1
Author and recipient unknown. 2nd century. Perhaps written by Quadratus, bishop of Athens, and addressed to the emperor Hadrian, former archon of Athens in the year 112.

2
I. EXORDIO As I see, excellence Diognetus, that you have great interest in understanding the religion of Christians and that your questions regarding them - about the God in whom they trust and how they worship him so as not to take the world into consideration and despise death; about how they do not pay the slightest attention to those considered gods by the Greeks, nor do they observe the superstition of the Jews; about the nature of the affection they have for each other; and about why this new interest has arisen in the lives of men now and not before - are done precisely and carefully, I congratulate you for such zeal and I ask God who provides us with both speaking and hearing, that I may be granted speaking in such a way that you can improve by hearing; and to you that you can listen so that the speaker is not disappointed.

3
II. REFUTATION OF IDOLATRY So, let go of all the preconceived opinions that occupy your mind, discard the habit that leads you astray, and become a new man, so to speak, from the beginning, as one who hears a new story, just as you have told of yourself. See not only with your eyes, but with your intellect as well, of what substance or in what form these whom you call gods and whom you consider as such turn out to be. Isn't one of them made of stone, like the one we trample under our feet, and another of bronze, no better than the vessels that are forged to be used, and another of wood, which is already beginning to become a prey to wormwood, and another of silver, which needs someone to guard it so that it is not stolen, and another of iron, corroded by rust, and another of clay, a material no better than that used to cover the least honorable services? Are they not of perishable matter? Are they not forged with iron and fire? Did not the sculptor make one, and the bronze caster another, and the silversmith another, and the potter another? Before the skill of these artisans gave them this shape, wouldn't it have been possible for each of them to change their shape and make them different utensils? Would it not be possible that what are now vessels made of the same material, placed in the hands of the same craftsmen, could become like them? Could not these things that you now worship be made again vessels like the others by the hands of man? Are they not all deaf and blind, soulless, senseless, motionless? Don't they all corrode and rot? You call these things gods, you are slaves to them and you worship them; and you end up being the same as them. And for this reason you hate Christians, because you do not consider them to be gods. Because, don't you, who at a given moment respect and adore them, despise them much more? Do you not actually mock them and insult them, worshiping those who are made of stone and clay without protecting them, but locking up those who are made of silver and gold during the night, and setting guards over them by day, to prevent them from being stolen? And, as regards the honors that you think you offer them, if they are sensitive to them, you rather punish them with it, while if they are insensitive you reproach them by propitiating them with the blood and tallow of the victims. Let one of you undergo this treatment, and suffer the things that are done to him.

4
Yes, not a single individual will willingly submit to such a punishment, since he has sensitivity and reason; but a stone submits, because it is insensitive. Therefore, you deny his sensitivity. Good; I could say much more about Christians not being slaves to gods like that; But although some believe that what has been said is not enough, it seems to me that it is superfluous to say more.

5
III. REFUTATION OF JUDAISM Next, I imagine that you are mainly eager to hear about how they do not practice their religion in the same way as the Jews. The Jews, insofar as they abstain from the mode of worship described above, do well in demanding reverence.

6
rence a God of the universe and consider Him as Lord, but as soon as they offer this worship with methods similar to those already described, they are completely in error. For while the Greeks, in offering these things to insensible and deaf images, make a display of foolishness, the Jews, considering that they are offering them to God, as if He had need of them, should rightly consider it folly and not religious worship. For He who made the heavens and the earth and all things in them, and provides us with all that we need, cannot Himself need any of these things which He Himself provides to those who imagine that they are giving them to Him. But those who believe that they offer sacrifices to Him with blood and fat and burnt offerings, and honor Him with these honors, seem to me to be in no way different from those who show the same respect towards deaf images; because some believe it appropriate to make offerings to things incapable of participating in the honor, and others to those who have no need of anything.

7
IV. INANITY OF JUDAIC OBSERVANCES But, in addition, his scruples regarding meats, his superstition with reference to the Sabbath and the vanity of his circumcision and the dissimulation of his fasts and new moons, I [do not] believe that it is necessary for you to learn from me that they are ridiculous and unworthy of any consideration. For is it not impious to accept some of the things created by God for man's use as well created, but to reject others as useless and superfluous? And furthermore, lying against God, as if He forbade us to do any good on the Sabbath day, is this not blasphemous? Furthermore, to praise the mutilation of the flesh as a token of choice, as if for this reason they were particularly loved by God, is it not ridiculous? And as for observing the stars and the moon, and keeping the observance of months and days, and distinguishing the ordering of God and the changes of the seasons according to their own impulses, making some festivals and others periods of mourning and lamentation, who could consider it an exhibition of piety and not much more of foolishness? That Christians are right, therefore, keeping away from the common folly and error of the Jews, and from their excessive meticulousness and pride, I consider to be something in which you are already sufficiently instructed; but, as to the mystery of your own religion, I do not hope that you can be instructed by any man.

8
V. CHRISTIAN PARADOXES Christians, in fact, are not distinguished from other men either by their land or by their speech or by their customs. Because they do not inhabit cities exclusive to them, nor do they speak a strange language, nor do they lead a way of life apart from others. In truth, this doctrine has not been invented thanks to the talent and speculation of curious men; nor do they profess, as others do, a

9
human teaching; but, inhabiting Greek or barbarian cities, according to the lot that fell to each one, and adapting in dress, food and other types of life to the uses and customs of each country, they show signs of a peculiar tenor of admirable conduct, and, by everyone's confession, surprising. They inhabit their own homelands, but as strangers; They take part in everything as citizens and endure everything as foreigners; Every foreign land is a homeland for them, and every homeland is a foreign land. They get married like everyone else; like everyone they beget children, but they do not expose those that are born to them. They put a common table, but no bed. They are in the flesh, but they do not live according to the flesh. They spend their time on earth, but have their citizenship in heaven. They obey the established laws; but with their lives they surpass the laws. They love everyone and are persecuted by everyone. They are unknown and condemned. They are killed and in doing so they are given life. They are poor and they enrich many. They lack everything and abound in everything. They are dishonored and in the same dishonors they are glorified. They are cursed and declared righteous. They revile them and they bless them. They are insulted and they give honor. They do good and are punished as evildoers; condemned to death, they rejoice as if they were given life. The Jews fight them like foreigners; They are persecuted by the Greeks and yet the same people who hate them cannot say the reason for their hatred.

10
VI. CHRISTIANS, SOUL OF THE WORLD But to put it briefly, what the soul is to the body, that is the Christians in the world. The soul is spread throughout all the members of the body, there are Christians in all the cities of the world. The soul dwells in the body, but does not come from the body: Christians dwell in the world, but are not of the world. The invisible soul is locked in prison, visible body; Thus Christians are known as those who live in the world, but their religion remains invisible. The flesh hates and fights the soul, without having received any grievance from it, because it does not allow it to enjoy pleasures; The world hates Christians, without having received any insult from them, because they renounce pleasures. The soul loves the flesh and the members that hate it, and Christians also love those who hate them. The soul is enclosed in the body, but it is what keeps the body together; Thus Christians are imprisoned in the world, as in a prison, but they are the ones who maintain the connection of the world. The immortal soul dwells in a mortal tent; Thus Christians live as if in transit in corruptible dwellings, while they wait for incorruption in heaven. The soul, mistreated in food and drink, is improved; Likewise, Christians, threatened with death every day, multiply more and more. Such is the position that God appointed them and it is not lawful for them to desert it.

11
VII. DIVINE ORIGIN OF CHRISTIANITY Because this [religion] that was transmitted to them is not, as I said, a human invention, nor would they consider a mortal thought worthy of being so carefully observed, nor have they been entrusted with the administration of earthly mysteries. No, but He who is truly omnipotent, creator of the universe and invisible God, He Himself brought down from the heavens His Truth and His holy and incomprehensible Word and lodged it in men and solidly established it in their hearts. And that, not by sending men, as someone might imagine, any of his servants, or an angel, or prince, one of those who govern terrestrial things, or any of those who are entrusted with the administrations of heaven, but to the same Artificer and Creator of the universe; He by whom he created the heavens; by whom he enclosed the sea within its own boundaries; The one whose mystery all the elements faithfully keep; from whose hand the sun received the measures that it must keep in its races of the day. [Don't you see] that they throw them to the wild beasts to deny the Lord, and yet they don't succeed? Don't you see that the more they punish them, the more they become abundant? These are not the works of man; They are the power of God; They are proof of their presence.

12
VIII. THE MANIFESTATION OF GOD IN THE INCARNATION For who at all among men ever knew what God was before He Himself came? Or are you going to accept the vain and stupid speeches of renowned philosophers? Some of them affirmed that God was fire (where they have to go, that is what they call God!); others, that water; others, any of the elements created by God himself. And there is no doubt that, if any of these propositions were acceptable, it could with the same reason be affirmed of each of the other creatures that he is God. But all this is nothing more than monstrosities and the madness of sorcerers; and the truth is that no man saw or knew God, but it was He Himself who manifested Himself. Now, it was manifested by faith, which alone is granted to see God. And, in fact, that God, who is the sovereign Owner and Artificer of the universe, who created all things and distinguished them according to their order, not only showed himself kind to man, but also long-suffering. In truth, he always was such and continues to be so and will be so, namely: merciful and good and meek and truthful; What's more, only He is good. And having conceived a great and ineffable plan, he communicated it only with his Son. Now, as long as he kept his wise counsel a secret and kept it, it seemed that he did not care and that nothing about us mattered to him; But when he revealed it to us through his beloved Son and showed us what he had planned, from the beginning, he gave it all to us together; not only to have a part in its good, but to see and understand things that none of us would have ever expected.

13
IX. THE DIVINE ECONOMY Thus, when God had everything arranged in Himself together with His Son, in the past He allowed, according to our disposition, that we let ourselves be carried away by our disordered impulses, carried away by pleasures and concupiscence. And it is not at all that He took pleasure in our sins, but that He endured them. Nor was it that God approved that time of iniquity, but that He was preparing the present time of justice, so that, convicted at that time by our own works of being unworthy of life, we might now be made worthy of it by the mercy of God; and having made it evident that by our own strength it was impossible for us to enter the kingdom of God, it is now granted to us to enter by the virtue of God. And when our wickedness reached its height and it became completely evident that the only reward we could expect from it was punishment and death, when the moment had come that God had predetermined to show us from now on his clemency and power (oh, kindness and excessive love of God!), he did not hate us, he did not throw us away, he did not hold any resentment towards us; rather he was long-suffering, he put up with us; He himself, out of pure mercy, took our sins upon himself; He himself gave his own Son as a ransom for us; to the Holy for sinners, to the Innocent for the wicked, to the Just for the unjust, to the Incorruptible for the corruptible, to the Immortal for mortals. For what else could cover our sins but His righteousness? In whom else could we, wicked and impious, be justified, but in the only Son of God? Oh sweet barter, oh unfathomable work, oh unexpected benefits! That the iniquity of many would be hidden in one Just One and the justice of one would justify many wicked ones! So, then, having convinced us in the past of the impossibility, on the part of our nature, of achieving life and having now shown us the Savior who can save even the impossible, he wanted us to have faith in his goodness and to look at him as our supporter, father, teacher, counselor, doctor, intelligence, light, honor, glory, strength, life... and not worry about clothing and food.

14
X. CHARITY, ESSENCE OF THE NEW RELIGION If you also wish to achieve this faith, try, above all, to acquire knowledge of the Father. Because God loved men, for whom he made the world, to whom he subdued everything on earth, to whom he granted intelligence and reason, to whom he allowed only to look up to contemplate him, to whom he formed his own image, to whom he sent his only begotten Son, to whom he promised his kingdom in heaven, which he will give to those who have loved him. Now, known God the Father, with what joy do you think you will be filled? or how

15
Will you love someone who loved you to such an extreme before? And by loving him, you will become an imitator of his goodness. And do not marvel that man can become an imitator of God. If God wants it, man can. Because happiness does not lie in tyrannically dominating our neighbors, nor in wanting to be above the weakest, nor in enriching oneself and violating those in need. This is not how anyone can imitate God, but all of this is alien to his magnificence. He who takes upon himself the burden of his neighbor; he who is ready to do good to his inferior in precisely that in which he is superior; He who, supplying to those in need the same thing that he received from God, becomes God to those who receive from his hand, this is the true imitator of God. Then, even while dwelling on earth, you will contemplate how God has his empire in heaven; then you will begin to speak the mysteries of God; then you will love and admire those who are punished with death for not denying God; then you will condemn the deceit and error of the world, when you know the true life of heaven, when you despise what here seems like death, when you fear what is truly death, reserved for those condemned to eternal fire, a fire that will torment to the end those who are thrown into it. When you know this fire, you will admire and consider blessed those who, for the love of justice, endure this other fire for a moment.

16
XI. EPILOGUE I do not speak of strange things nor do I go in search of the absurd, but, disciple of the Apostles, I become a teacher of the nations: I do nothing but transmit what has been given to me to those who have become worthy disciples of the truth. For who, having been rightly taught and begotten by the kind Word, does not seek to know clearly what was manifestly shown by the same Word to his disciples? The Word manifested it to them, in his appearance, speaking to them freely. Misunderstood by the unbelievers, He conversed with His disciples, who, recognized by Him as faithful, knew the mysteries of the Father. That is precisely why God sent the Word, so that he would manifest himself to the world; Word that, despised by the people, preached by the Apostles, was believed by the Gentiles. He, who is from the beginning, who appeared new and was found old and who is always born new in the hearts of the saints. He, who is always, who is today recognized as Son, by whom the Church is enriched, and grace, deployed, multiplies in the saints; grace that seeks intelligence, manifests mysteries, announces times, rejoices in believers, is distributed to those who seek, to those who do not violate the rules of faith or transgress the limits of the Fathers. Then the fear of the law is proclaimed, the grace of the prophets is recognized, the faith of the Gospels is established, the tradition of the Apostles is kept and the grace of the Church leaps for joy. If you do not grieve this grace, you will know what the Word speaks through whom he wants and when he wants. And, in fact, when

17
These things we were moved to explain to you with zeal by the will of the Word that inspires them in us, we communicate them to you for the love of the same things that have been revealed to us. If you pay attention and listen to them with determination, you will know what good things God provides for those who loyally love him, how they become a paradise of delight, producing in themselves a fertile and leafy tree, adorned with every variety of fruits. Because in this place the tree of knowledge and the tree of life were planted; But it is not science that kills, but disobedience that kills. Indeed, not without mystery it is written that God planted in the beginning the tree of knowledge and the tree of life in the middle of paradise, giving us to understand life through science; but, because the first men did not use it in a pure way, they were left naked by the seduction of the serpent. Because there is no life without science, nor sure science without true life; hence the two trees were planted close to each other. The Apostle understanding this meaning and rebuking science that is exercised without the commandment of truth in order to life, says: Science puffs up, but charity edifies. Because he who thinks he knows something without true science and attested by life, knows nothing, but is seduced by the serpent for not having loved life. But he who through fear has attained knowledge and also seeks life, he plants in hope and awaits the fruit. Be heart science for you; life, however, the true Word understood. If you bear its tree and produce its fruit in abundance, you will always reap what is desirable before God, fruit that the serpent does not touch and with which deceit is not mixed; nor is Eve corrupted, but is believed to be a virgin; Salvation is shown, the Apostles become wise, and the Passover of the Lord is brought forward, and He espouses the world and, as He instructs the saints, the Word rejoices, through whom the Father is glorified. To Him be glory forever. Amen. [Full text of the Letter, according to the edition of Daniel Ruiz Bueno in Padres Apostólicos, BAC, Madrid 1950. The translation has been slightly adapted by IGLESIA VIVA]
