1
1. The canons of this Code are only for the Latin Church.

2
2. The Code, ordinarily, does not determine the rites that must be observed in the celebration of liturgical actions; Therefore, the liturgical laws in force until now retain their force except when any of them are contrary to the canons of the Code.
2. The violation of ecclesiastical laws and everything that contains reason for sin, with regard to the determination of guilt and the imposition of ecclesiastical penalties.
2. § 2 . As soon as the sentence has become enforceable, the judicial Vicar must notify it to the Ordinary of the place where the marriage was celebrated. And he must ensure that the nullity that has been declared and the prohibitions that may have been added are noted as soon as possible in the marriage book and in the baptism book.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
Art. 4 — EVIDENCE

3
3. The canons of the Code do not abrogate or repeal the agreements of the Holy See with nations or with other political societies; Therefore, these agreements remain in force as before, without prejudice to the contrary provisions of this Code.

4
4. The acquired rights, as well as the privileges hitherto granted by the Apostolic See, both to natural and legal persons, that are in use and have not been revoked, remain intact unless they are expressly revoked by the canons of this Code.

5
5. § 1 . Universal or particular customs currently in force and contrary to these canons are totally suppressed if they are rejected in the canons of this Code, and they must not be allowed to revive in the future; The others are also suppressed, unless the Code expressly establishes otherwise, or they are centuries old or immemorial, which can be tolerated when, weighing the circumstances of the places and people, the Ordinary judges that it is not possible to suppress them.
§ 2 . The extralegal customs, both universal and particular, that are currently in force remain.

6
6. § 1 . Since the entry into force of this Code, the following are repealed:
1 the Code of Canon Law promulgated in 1917;
2 other laws, universal or particular, contrary to the prescriptions of this Code, unless otherwise expressly established regarding the particular ones;
3 any penal laws, universal or particular, promulgated by the Apostolic See, unless they are received in this same Code;
4 the other universal disciplinary laws on matters that are completely regulated in this Code.
§ 2 . To the extent that they reproduce ancient law, the canons of this Code must be understood also taking into account canonical tradition.

7
7. The law is established when it is promulgated.

8
8. § 1 . Universal ecclesiastical laws are promulgated by publication in the official Gazette Acta Apostolicae Sedis, unless, in particular cases, another method of promulgation has been prescribed; and come into force after three months from the date indicated in the corresponding number of the Minutes, unless they are immediately obligatory due to the very nature of the matter, or unless a longer or shorter vacation is specially and expressly established in the same law.
§ 2 . Particular laws are promulgated according to the manner determined by the legislator, and begin to be binding after one month from the day they were promulgated, unless another term is established in the same law.

9
9. Laws are for future events, not for past events, unless something is expressly provided for them.

10
10. Only those laws in which it is expressly established that an act is void or a person is unskilled must be considered invalidating or disqualifying.

11
11. Purely ecclesiastical laws bind those baptized into the Catholic Church and those who have been received into it, provided that they have sufficient reason and, if the law does not expressly provide otherwise, have reached the age of seven years.

12
12. § 1 . Universal laws bind all those for whom they have been given throughout the world.
§ 2 . All those who are in fact located in that territory are exempt from universal laws that are not in force in a given territory.
§ 3 . The laws enacted for a peculiar territory are binding, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 13, to those for whom they have been given, if they have their domicile or quasi-domicile there and also live in fact in that place.

13
13. § 1 . Particular laws are not presumed personal, but territorial, unless otherwise stated.
§ 2 . Passers-by are not subject:
1 to the particular laws of their territory when they are outside it, unless their transgression causes damage in their own territory or they are personal laws;
2 nor to the laws of the territory in which they are located, except those that concern the protection of public order, determine the formalities that must be observed in the acts, or refer to immovable things located in the territory.
§ 3 . Vagrants are bound by the laws, both universal and particular, that are in force in the place where they are.

14
14. Laws, even if they are invalidating or disqualifying, do not bind in doubt of law; In case of factual doubt, the Ordinaries can dispense from them, provided that, in the case of a reserved dispensation, the authority usually grants it to the person who reserves it.

15
15. § 1 . Ignorance or error about invalidating or disabling laws does not prevent their effectiveness, as long as nothing else is expressly established.
§ 2 . Ignorance or error about a law, a penalty, one's own fact, or a well-known fact of another is not presumed; It is presumed, until the contrary is proven, about an external, non-notorious fact.

16
16. § 1 . The laws are authentically interpreted by the legislator and by the person to whom he has entrusted the power to interpret them authentically.
§ 2 . The authentic interpretation manifested in the form of a law has equal force with the law itself, and must be promulgated; It has retroactive effect if it only clarifies words of the law that are true in themselves; But if it restricts the law or extends it or explains what is doubtful, it has no retroactive effect.
§ 3 . But the interpretation made by a judicial ruling or administrative act in a particular case does not have the force of law, and only binds people and affects the things for which it was given.

17
17. Ecclesiastical laws must be understood according to the proper meaning of the words, considered in the text and in the context; If it is doubtful and obscure, one must resort to parallel places, when there are any, to the purpose and circumstances of the law and to the intention of the legislator.

18
18. Laws that establish a penalty, restrict the free exercise of rights, or contain an exception to the law must be strictly interpreted.

19
19. When, on a given matter, there is no express prescription of universal or particular law or custom, the case, unless it is criminal, must be decided taking into account the laws given for similar cases, the general principles of law applied with canonical equity, the jurisprudence and practice of the Roman Curia, and the common and constant opinion of doctors.

20
20. The subsequent law repeals or repeals the preceding one, if it expressly establishes it, or is directly contrary to it, or completely orders the matter that was the object of the previous law; However, universal law does not derogate in any way from particular or special law, unless something else is expressly provided in the law.

21
21. In case of doubt, the revocation of the preceding law is not presumed, but subsequent laws must be compared and, to the extent possible, reconciled with the previous ones.

22
22. The civil laws to which the law of the Church refers must be observed in canon law with the same effects, as long as they are not contrary to divine law or otherwise provided in canon law.

23
23. Only that custom has the force of law that, introduced by a community of faithful, has been approved by the legislator, in accordance with the canons that follow.

24
24. § 1 . No custom can achieve the force of law if it is contrary to divine right.
§ 2 . Nor can a custom against the law or extralegal achieve the force of law if it is not reasonable; The custom expressly condemned by law is not reasonable.

25
25. No custom can achieve the force of law except that which is observed, with the intention of introducing law, by a community capable, at least, of being the passive subject of a law.

26
26. Except in the case where it has been specially approved by the competent legislator, custom against law or extralegal only achieves the force of law if it has been legitimately observed for thirty continuous and complete years; But, against canon law that contains a clause prohibiting future customs, only a centuries-old or immemorial custom can prevail.

27
27. Custom is the best interpreter of laws.

28
28. Subject to the provisions of c. 5, custom, whether against the law or extralegal, is revoked by contrary custom or law; But, unless it expressly cites them, the law does not revoke centuries-old or immemorial customs, nor does universal law revoke particular customs.

29
29. General decrees, by which the competent legislator establishes common prescriptions for a community capable of being the passive subject of a law, are properly laws and are governed by the provisions of the canons relating to them.

30
30. Whoever enjoys only executive power cannot give the general decree referred to in c. 29, except in particular cases in which this has been expressly granted by the competent legislator, in accordance with the law, and if the conditions established in the act of concession are met.

31
31. § 1 . Those who enjoy executive power can issue, within the limits of their own competence, general executory decrees, that is, those by which the manner to be observed in compliance with the law is determined in more detail, or the observance of the laws is urged.
§ 2 . Regarding the promulgation and vacation of the decrees referred to in § 1, observe the prescriptions of c. 8.

32
32. General executory decrees bind those who bind the laws whose conditions of execution determine or whose observance those same decrees urge.

33
33. § 1 . General executory decrees, even if published in directories or documents of another name, do not repeal the laws, and their prescriptions that are contrary to the laws have no value.
§ 2 . Such decrees lose their force by explicit or implicit revocation made by the competent authority, and also upon the cessation of the law for whose execution they were given; but they do not cease when the power of the person who dictated them expires, unless otherwise expressly provided.

34
34. § 1 . The instructions, by which the prescriptions of the laws are clarified, and the ways in which the law is to be executed are developed and determined, are directed to those whose responsibility it is to ensure that the laws are fulfilled, and bind them to the execution of the same; Those who have executive power can legitimately give instructions, within the limits of their competence.
§ 2 . What is ordered in the instructions does not repeal the laws, and what is incompatible with them has no value.
§ 3 . The instructions cease to have force, not only due to explicit or implicit revocation of the competent authority that issued them, or of its superior, but also when the law for whose clarification or execution they were given ceases.

35
35. The singular administrative act, whether a decree or precept, or a rescript, can be given by whoever has executive power, within the limits of his or her jurisdiction, remaining firm what is prescribed in c. 76 § 1 .

36
36. § 1 . The administrative act must be understood according to the proper meaning of the words and the common way of speaking; In case of doubt, those that refer to litigation or the summons or imposition of penalties must be strictly interpreted, as well as those that restrict the rights of the person, harm the acquired rights of third parties or are contrary to a law in favor of individuals; all others should be interpreted broadly.
§ 2 . The administrative act should not extend to other cases outside of those expressed.

37
37. The administrative act that affects the external jurisdiction must be recorded in writing; Likewise its act of execution, if it is carried out in a commissionary manner.
37. 1 § 1 . The apostolic vicariate or apostolic prefecture is a certain portion of the people of God that, due to peculiar circumstances, has not yet been constituted as a diocese, and is entrusted to the pastoral care of a Vicar Apostolic or an Apostolic Prefect to govern them in the name of the Supreme Pontiff.
§ 2 . The apostolic administration is a certain portion of the people of God that, for special and particularly serious reasons, is not erected as a diocese by the Roman Pontiff, and whose pastoral care is entrusted to an Apostolic Administrator, who governs it in the name of the Supreme Pontiff.

38
38. Any administrative act, even if it is a motu proprio rescript, has no effect to the extent that it damages the acquired right of a third party or is contrary to a law or an approved custom, unless the competent authority has expressly added a derogatory clause.

39
39. Only those conditions that are expressed by the particles "if", "unless" or "as long as" affect the validity of the administrative act.

40
40. The executor of an administrative act invalidly performs his function if he acts before receiving the corresponding document and having recognized its authenticity and integrity, unless he had been previously informed of the document with the authority of the person who gave the act.

41
41. The executor of an administrative act, who is merely entrusted with the service of executing it, cannot deny its execution, unless it is clearly stated that said act is null, or that for another serious reason it is not appropriate to execute it, or that the conditions expressed in the same administrative act have not been met; but if the execution of the administrative act seems inopportune due to the circumstances of the person or place, the executor must suspend said execution; In such cases, it will immediately be brought to the attention of the authority that issued the act.

42
42. The executor of an administrative act must proceed in accordance with the mandate; and the execution is void if it does not comply with the essential conditions indicated in the document, or does not observe the substantial procedure.

43
43. The executor of an administrative act may appoint a substitute at his discretion, unless the substitution has been prohibited, or the person has been chosen based on his personal qualities, or the person of the substitute has been determined in advance; but, even in these cases, the executor may entrust the preparatory acts to another.

44
44. The person who succeeds the executor in his office may also execute the administrative act, unless the executor had been chosen based on his personal qualities.

45
45. If, in the execution of an administrative act, the executor has made any error, it is lawful for him to carry it out again.

46
46. The administrative act does not cease when the power of the person who did it is extinguished, unless the law expressly provides otherwise.

47
47. The revocation of an administrative act by another administrative act of the competent authority only takes effect from the moment in which it is legitimately notified to its addressee.

48
48. A singular decree means the administrative act of the competent executive authority, by which, according to the rules of law and for a particular case, a decision is made or a provision is made that, by its nature, does not presuppose the request of an interested party.

49
49. The singular precept is a decree by which the obligation to do or omit something is directly and legitimately imposed on a specific person or persons, especially to urge observance of the law.

50
50. Before issuing a singular decree, the authority should gather the necessary information and evidence, and to the extent possible, hear from those whose rights may be harmed.
50. 4 The erection, innovation or suppression of a cathedral chapter is reserved to the Apostolic See.

51
51. The decree must be given in writing, and if it is a decision, stating the reasons, at least summarily.

52
52. The singular decree affects only the things it deals with and the people to whom it is addressed; but it obliges them anywhere, unless otherwise stated.

53
53. If there are decrees contradictory to each other, the peculiar prevails over the general with respect to those things that are established peculiarly; If they are equally peculiar or general, the later one repeals the previous one, to the extent that it contradicts it.

54
54. § 1 . The singular decree whose application is entrusted to an executor takes effect from the moment of execution; Otherwise, from the moment in which the recipient is notified by order of the person who decreed it.
§ 2 . In order to demand compliance with a singular decree, it must have been issued by a legitimate document, in accordance with the law.

55
55. Without prejudice to the provisions of cc. 37 and 51, when a very serious cause prevents the text of the decree from being delivered in writing, it will be considered notified by reading it to the recipient before a notary or before two witnesses, drawing up a record that must be signed by all those present.

56
56. The decree is considered intimated if the recipient, duly summoned to receive it or hear its reading, does not appear, or refuses to sign, without just cause.

57
57. § 1 . When the law prescribes that a decree be issued, or when the interested party legitimately presents a petition or appeal to obtain a decree, the competent authority must provide within three months following receipt of the petition or appeal, unless another period is prescribed by law.
§ 2 . After this period, if the decree has not yet been issued, a negative response is presumed for the purposes of proposing a subsequent appeal.
§ 3 . The presumption of a negative response does not exempt the competent authority from the obligation to issue the decree, and even to repair the damage that may have been caused in accordance with c 128.

58
58. § 1 . The singular decree ceases to have force due to the legitimate revocation made by the competent authority, as well as when the law for whose execution it was given ceases.
§ 2 . The singular precept not imposed by a legitimate document loses its value when the power of the person who ordered it ceases.

59
59. § 1 . The rescript is an administrative act that the competent executive authority issues in writing, and that by its very nature grants a privilege, a dispensation or other grace, at the request of the interested party.
§ 2 . What is established on the rescripts also applies to the granting of a license, and to the granting of thanks by word of mouth, unless otherwise stated.

60
60. All those who are not expressly prohibited may obtain any rescript.

61
61. If nothing else is stated, a rescript can be obtained in favor of another even without his or her consent, and it is valid before acceptance, without prejudice to contrary clauses.

62
62. The rescript in which the executor is not designated takes effect from the moment the document has been issued; the others, from the moment of their execution.

63
63. § 1 . The subreption or concealment of the truth prevents the validity of a rescript, if the prayers have not set out everything that, according to canonical law, style and practice, must be manifested for its validity, unless it is a rescript of grace granted Motu proprio.
§ 2 . The obstruction or exposure of something false is also an obstacle to the validity of a rescript, if not even one of the alleged motivational causes is true.
§ 3 . In rescripts that do not have an executor, the motivating cause must be true at the time the rescript is granted; in the other rescripts, at the time of their execution.

64
64. Without prejudice to the right of the Penitentiary to the internal forum, a grace denied by any dicastery of the Roman Curia cannot be validly granted by another dicastery of the same Curia or by another competent authority lower than the Roman Pontiff, without the consent of the dicastery with which it began to be dealt with.
64. 9 § 1 . Remaining safe from what the CC prescribes

65
65. § 1 . Without prejudice to the provisions of §§ 2 and 3, no one asks another Ordinary for a favor that has been denied by his own Ordinary, without stating such denial; and, when it is stated, the Ordinary must not grant the grace without first having received from the first the reasons for the refusal.
§ 2 . The grace denied by the Vicar General or by an Episcopal Vicar cannot be validly granted by another Vicar of the same Bishop, even having obtained from the denying Vicar the reasons for the denial.
§ 3 . The grace that, having been denied by the Vicar General or by an Episcopal Vicar, is obtained after the diocesan Bishop without mentioning that refusal is invalid; but the grace denied by the diocesan Bishop cannot be validly obtained from the Vicar General, or from an Episcopal Vicar, without the consent of the Bishop, not even making mention of such refusal.

66
66. The rescript is not invalid when there is an error in the name of the person to whom it is granted or who grants it, of the place in which he resides, or of the matter in question, provided that, in the opinion of the Ordinary, there is no doubt about the identity of the subject and object.

67
67. § 1 . If, on the same matter, two contradictory rescripts are obtained, the peculiar prevails over the general with respect to those things that are expressed peculiarly.
§ 2 . If they are equally peculiar or general, the previous one prevails over the later, unless the second expressly refers to the first, or unless the first applicant who obtained the rescript did not use it due to fraud or notable negligence.
§ 3 . In case of doubt about whether or not a rescript is invalid, one must resort to the person who granted it.
67. 1 A religious must not accept positions or offices outside his own institute without permission from the legitimate Superior.

68
68. A rescript from the Apostolic See in which an executor is not designated must be presented to the Ordinary of the applicant who obtained it, only when this is stated in the grant document, it concerns public matters, or it is necessary to verify some conditions.

69
69. The rescript for the presentation of which no deadline is determined, may be presented at any time to the executor, as long as there is no fraud or fraud.

70
70. If in the rescript the concession itself is entrusted to the executor, it is up to him, according to his prudent discretion and conscience, to grant or deny the grace.

71
71. No one is obliged to use a rescript granted only in his favor, unless he is canonically obliged to do so for another reason.

72
72. Rescripts granted by the Apostolic See that have expired can be extended only once and with just cause by the diocesan Bishop, but not for more than three months.

73
73. No rescript is revoked by a contrary law, if said law does not provide otherwise.

74
74. Although anyone can use in the internal forum a grace that has been granted to him orally, he has the obligation to prove it for the external forum as many times as this is legitimately demanded of him.

75
75. If the rescript contains a privilege or dispensation, the prescriptions of the canons that follow must also be observed.

76
76. § 1 . The privilege, that is, the grace granted by a peculiar act in favor of certain persons, both natural and legal, can be granted by the legislator and also by the executive authority to which the legislator has granted this power.
§ 2 . Centenary or immemorial possession presumes the granting of a privilege.

77
77. The privilege must be interpreted in accordance with c. 36 § 1 ; but it must always be interpreted in such a way that those who have it really get some advantage.

78
78. § 1 . The privilege is presumed perpetual, until the contrary is proven.
§ 2 . Personal privilege, which follows the person, extinguishes with him.
§ 3 . The royal privilege ceases when the object or place is completely destroyed; However, local privilege revives if the place is rebuilt within fifty years.

79
79. The privilege ceases by revocation of the competent authority, in accordance with c. 47, without prejudice to the provisions of c. 81.

80
80. § 1 . No privilege ceases due to renunciation, unless it has been accepted by the competent authority.
§ 2 . Any natural person may renounce a privilege granted solely in his favor.
§ 3 . Individuals cannot renounce the privilege granted to a legal entity, either by reason of the dignity of the place or the object; nor can the same legal entity renounce a privilege that has been granted to it, if the renunciation results in detriment to the Church or others.

81
81. The privilege is not extinguished when the right of the person who granted it ceases, unless it was granted with the clause of our approval or another equivalent.

82
82. The privilege that is not onerous for others does not cease due to disuse or contrary use; but that which results in the burden of others is lost by legitimate prescription.

83
83. § 1 . The privilege ceases when the term expires or the number of cases for which it was granted is exhausted, without prejudice to what is prescribed in the c

84
84. Whoever abuses the power that has been granted to him by privilege, deserves to be deprived of it; Consequently, the Ordinary, after having uselessly admonished the holder of the privilege, deprives the person who seriously abuses the privilege if he himself granted it; but if the privilege was granted by the Holy See, the Ordinary must inform it of the matter.

85
85. The dispensation, or relaxation of a purely ecclesiastical law in a particular case, can be granted within the limits of their competence, by those who have executive power, as well as by those who have the power to dispense explicitly or implicitly, either by right or by legitimate delegation.

86
86. Laws that determine the essential constituent elements of institutions or legal acts are not dispensable.

87
87. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop, whenever, in his opinion, this results in the spiritual good of the faithful, may exempt them from the disciplinary laws, both universal and particular, promulgated for his territory or for his subjects by the supreme authority of the Church; but not from procedural or criminal laws, nor from those whose dispensation is specially reserved for the Apostolic See or other authority.
§ 2 . If it is difficult to resort to the Holy See and there is also a danger of serious harm in the delay, any Ordinary may dispense from such laws, even if the dispensation is reserved for the Holy See, provided that it is a dispensation that the Holy See usually grants in the same circumstances, without prejudice to the provisions of c. 291.

88
88. The local Ordinary can dispense from diocesan laws, and, when he considers that it is for the good of the faithful, from the laws promulgated by the regional or provincial Council, or by the Episcopal Conference.

89
89. The parish priest and other priests or deacons cannot dispense from universal and particular law unless this power has been expressly granted to them.

90
90. § 1 . Do not dispense with ecclesiastical law without just and reasonable cause, taking into account the circumstances of the case and the seriousness of the law from which you dispense; Otherwise, the dispensation is illicit and if it has not been granted by the legislator himself or by his superior, it is also invalid.
§ 2 . When there is doubt about the sufficiency of the cause, the dispensation is validly and lawfully granted.

91
91. Whoever has the power to dispense can exercise it with respect to his subjects, even when he is outside the territory, and even if they are absent from it; and if the contrary is not expressly established, also with respect to transients who are actually in the territory, and with respect to itself.

92
92. Not only the dispensation must be strictly interpreted, in accordance with c. 36 § 1 , but also the same power to dispense granted for a specific case.

93
93. The dispensation that has a successive tract ceases in the same way as the privilege, as well as by the certain and total cessation of the motivating cause.

94
94. § 1 . Statutes, in the proper sense, are the rules established by law in corporations or foundations, by which their purpose, constitution, regime and way of acting are determined.
§ 2 . The bylaws of a corporation bind only those persons who are legitimate members of it; the statutes of a foundation to those who care for its government.
§ 3 . The prescriptions of the statutes that have been established and promulgated by virtue of the legislative power are governed by the norms of the canons about the laws.

95
95. § 1 . Regulations are rules or norms that must be observed in meetings of people, both convened by the ecclesiastical authority and freely promoted by the faithful, as well as in other celebrations; They determine what is related to its constitution, regime and procedure.
§ 2 . In meetings or celebrations, these regulatory norms bind those who take part in them.

96
96. Through baptism, man joins the Church of Christ and becomes a person in it, with the duties and rights that are proper to Christians, taking into account the condition of each one, as long as they are in the ecclesiastical communion and are not prevented by a legitimately imposed sanction.

97
97. § 1 . The person who has turned eighteen years old is older; before that age, it is minor.
§ 2 . The minor, before turning seven years old, is called an infant, and is considered without the use of reason; Once he is seven years old, he is presumed to have the use of reason.

98
98. § 1 . The elderly person has the full exercise of their rights.
§ 2 . The minor is subject to the power of the parents or guardians in the exercise of their rights, except in those cases in which, by divine law or canon law, minors are exempt from that power; Regarding the appointment and power of guardians, the prescriptions of civil law must be observed unless otherwise established by canon law, or unless the diocesan Bishop, with just cause, deems that in specific cases it must be provided by appointment of another guardian.

99
99. Those who habitually lack the use of reason are considered not to be masters of themselves and are equated to infants.

100
100. The person is called: "neighbor", in the place where he or she resides; "stranger", where he has his quasi-domicile; "transient", if he is outside the domicile or quasi-domicile that he still maintains; "vague", if he does not have a domicile or quasi-domicile anywhere.

101
101. § 1 . The place of origin of a child, even that of a neophyte, is that where its parents, at the time of the child's birth, had their domicile, or failing that, the quasi-domicile; or where the mother had them, if the parents did not have the same domicile or quasi-domicile.
§ 2 . If it is a child of lazy people, his place of origin is the one where he was born; if a foundling, the place where it was found.

102
102. § 1 . Domicile is acquired by residence in the territory of a parish or at least a diocese, which is either linked to the intention to remain there perpetually if nothing prevents it, or has lasted for a complete five-year period.
§ 2 . Quasi-domicile is acquired by residence in the territory of a parish or at least a diocese, which is either linked to the intention to remain there for at least three months if nothing prevents it, or has actually been extended for three months.
§ 3 . The domicile or quasi-domicile in the territory of a parish is called parochial; in the territory of a diocese, although not in a parish, diocesan.
102. § 2 .

103
103. Members of religious institutes and societies of apostolic life acquire domicile where the house to which they belong is located; and quasi-domicile, in the place of the house where they reside in accordance with the c

104
104. Whether the spouses have a common domicile or quasi-domicile; In the event of legitimate separation or for another just cause, each person can have their own domicile or quasi-domicile.

105
105. §1 . The minor necessarily has the domicile and quasi-domicile of the person to whose power he is subject. He who has left childhood can also acquire his own quasi-domicile; and if he is legitimately emancipated in accordance with civil law, including his own domicile.
§ 2 . He who is legitimately subject to guardianship or curatorship for reasons other than minority, has the domicile and quasi-domicile of the guardian or curator.

106
106. The domicile and the quasi-domicile are lost when leaving the place with the intention of not returning, remaining safe as prescribed by c. 105.

107
107. § 1 . For both domicile and quasi-domicile, each person has their own parish priest and Ordinary.
§ 2 . The parish priest and ordinary of the vagrant are those of the place where he is currently located.
§ 3 . The parish priest is also the one who has only the diocesan domicile or quasi-domicile of the place where he currently resides.

108
108. §1 . Consanguinity is computed by lines and degrees.
§ 2 . In a straight line, there are as many degrees as there are generations or people, discounting the trunk.
§ 3 . In a collateral line, there are as many degrees as there are people in both lines, discounting the trunk.

109
109. §1 . Affinity arises from a valid marriage, even if not consummated, and occurs between the man and the woman's blood relatives, and equally between the woman and the man's blood relatives.
§ 2 . It is counted in such a way that the blood relatives of the man are in the same line and degree related to the woman, and vice versa.

110
110. Children who have been adopted in accordance with civil law are considered children of the person or persons who adopted them.

111
111. n § 1 . With the reception of baptism, the child of the parents who belong to it is assigned to the Latin Church or, if one of the two does not belong to it, when both parents by common agreement have chosen that the offspring be baptized in the Latin Church; If there is no common agreement, it is assigned to the Church sui iuris to which the father belongs.
§ 2 . If only one of the parents is Catholic, he or she is attached to the Church to which this Catholic parent belongs.
§ 3 . Any baptized person who has reached fourteen years of age can freely choose to be baptized in the Latin Church or in another Church sui iuris; In this case, it belongs to the Church you have chosen.
111. § 1 . The child whose parents belong to the Latin Church joins it by receiving baptism, or if one of them does not belong to the Latin Church, when they decide by common agreement that the offspring be baptized into it; If there is no agreement, he joins the Church of the rite to which the father belongs.
§ 2 . The baptized person who has reached the age of fourteen can freely choose to be baptized in the Latin Church or in another autonomous ritual Church; In this case, he belongs to the Church he has chosen.

112
112. n § 1 . After receiving baptism they are assigned to another Church sui iuris:
1. Whoever obtains a license from the Apostolic See.
2. The spouse who, upon or during marriage, declares that he or she passes to the Church sui iuris of the other spouse; but once the marriage is dissolved he can freely return to the Latin Church.
3. The children of those mentioned in numbers 1 and 2 before reaching fourteen years of age and, similarly, in a mixed marriage, the children of the Catholic party who has legitimately passed to another Church sui iuris; However, upon reaching that age, they themselves can return to the Latin Church.
§ 2 . The custom, however prolonged, of receiving the sacraments according to the rite of another Church sui iuris does not entail affiliation to said Church.
§ 3 . Any transfer to another Church sui iuris has value from the moment of the declaration made in the presence of the Ordinary of the place of said Church or the parish priest itself or the priest delegated by one of them and two witnesses, unless a rescript of the Apostolic See provides otherwise; and it will be recorded in the baptism book.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio De concordia inter Codices, dated May 31, 2016)]:
112. § 1 . After receiving baptism, they join another autonomous ritual Church:
1 who obtains a license from the Apostolic See;
2 the spouse who, upon or during marriage, declares that he or she passes to the autonomous ritual Church to which the other spouse belongs; but, once the marriage is dissolved, he can freely return to the Latin Church;
3 the children of those mentioned in nos. 1 and 2 before turning fourteen years of age, and likewise, in a mixed marriage, the children of the Catholic party who have legitimately passed to another ritual Church; but, upon reaching that age, they can return to the Latin Church.
§ 2 . The custom, however long-standing, of receiving the sacraments according to the rite of some autonomous ritual Church does not entail affiliation to said Church.

113
113. § 1 . The Catholic Church and the Apostolic See are moral persons by the same divine ordination.
§ 2 . In the Church, in addition to natural persons, there are also legal persons, who are subject in canon law to obligations and rights consistent with their own nature.

114
114. § 1 . Legal persons are constituted, either by the same prescription of law or by special concession of the competent authority given by decree, groups of people (corporations) or things (foundations) ordered to a purpose consistent with the mission of the Church that transcends the purpose of individuals.
§ 2 . The purposes referred to in § 1 are understood to be those that correspond to works of piety, apostolate or charity, both spiritual and temporal.
§ 3 . The competent authority of the Church does not confer legal personality except on those corporations or foundations that pursue a truly useful goal and that, weighing all the circumstances, have means that are expected to be sufficient to achieve the goal they propose.
114. § 2 and established as legal entities by the competent ecclesiastical authority;
2 non-autonomous pious foundations, that is, temporal goods, given in any way to a public legal entity with the burden of celebrating Masses and fulfilling other ecclesiastical functions determined with the annual income, for a long period of time, which will be determined by particular law, or otherwise pursuing the purposes indicated in c.
114. § 2 .
§ 2 . Once the term has expired, the assets of a non-autonomous pious foundation, if they have been entrusted to a legal entity subject to the diocesan Bishop, must be allocated to the institute referred to in c.

115
115. § 1 . In the Church, legal persons are either corporations or foundations.
§ 2 . The corporation, whose constitution requires at least three people, is collegial if its activity is determined by the members, who, with or without equal rights, participate in the decisions in accordance with the law and the statutes; Otherwise, it is uncollegial.
§ 3 . The patrimonial legal entity or autonomous foundation consists of assets or things, spiritual or material, and is directed, according to the rule of law and the statutes, by one or several natural persons, or by a college.

116
116. § 1 . Public legal entities are corporations and foundations constituted by the competent ecclesiastical authority so that, within the limits indicated to them, they fulfill in the name of the Church, in accordance with the prescriptions of law, the mission entrusted to them with a view to the public good; The other legal entities are private.
§ 2 . Public legal entities acquire this personality, either by virtue of the same right, or by special decree of the competent authority that expressly grants it to them; Private legal entities obtain this personality only through a special decree of the competent authority that expressly grants it.
116. 3 § 1 . A marriage void due to impediment or defect of the legitimate form can be healed, as long as the consent of both parties persists.
§ 2 . A marriage void due to an impediment of natural or positive divine law can only be healed once the impediment has ceased.
116. 8 The clergyman provided with the due power is the minister of sacramentals; But, according to what is established in the liturgical books and in the judgment of the Ordinary, some sacramentals can also be administered by lay people who possess the proper qualities.

117
117. No corporation or foundation that wishes to obtain legal personality can obtain it if its statutes have not been approved by the competent authority.

118
118. Those who are recognized by universal or particular law, or by the statutes themselves, represent the public legal entity, acting on its behalf; Those to whom the statutes attribute such competence represent the private legal entity.

119
119. Regarding collegiate acts, as long as the law or the statutes do not provide otherwise:
1 when it comes to elections, what has legal value is that which, with the majority of those who must be called present, is approved by an absolute majority of those present; After two ineffective canvasses, the vote is held on the two candidates who have obtained the greatest number of votes, or if there are more, on the two oldest; After the third vote, if the tie persists, the oldest is elected;
2 when dealing with other matters, what is legally valid is what, being
most of those who must be summoned are present, it is approved by an absolute majority of those present; If after two counts the equality of votes persists, the president can resolve the tie with his vote;
3 but what affects each and every one must be approved by all.

120
120. § 1 . Every legal entity is, by nature, perpetual; However, it expires if it is legitimately suppressed by the competent authority, or if its activity has ceased for a period of one hundred years; The private legal entity is also extinguished when the association itself is dissolved in accordance with its statutes, or if, in the opinion of the competent authority, the same foundation has ceased to exist according to its statutes.
§ 2 . When there remains only one member of the collegiate legal entity and, according to its statutes, the corporation has not ceased to exist, that member is responsible for the exercise of all the rights of the corporation.

121
121. If the corporations and foundations that are public legal entities join together to form a single entity with legal personality, this new legal entity takes over the assets and property rights of the previous ones, and assumes the burdens that weighed on them; but they must remain safe, especially regarding the destination of the assets and compliance with the obligations, the will of the founders and donors, and the acquired rights.

122
122. When a public legal entity is divided in such a way that a part of it is united with another public legal entity, or with the dismembered part a new public legal entity is erected, the ecclesiastical authority responsible for carrying out the division, respecting above all the will of the founders and donors, the acquired rights and the approved statutes, must ensure by itself or by an executor:
1 that the common assets and property rights that can be divided, as well as debts and other charges, are distributed in due proportion and equitably between the legal entities in question, taking into account all the circumstances and needs of both;
2 that the two legal entities enjoy the use and usufruct of the common assets that cannot be divided, and that the burdens inherent to those assets fall on both, also maintaining the due proportion, which must be determined equitably.

123
123. When a public legal entity is extinguished, the destination of its assets and property rights, as well as its charges, is governed by the law and the statutes; In the event of their silence, they pass to the immediately superior legal entity, always remaining safe the will of the founders or donors, as well as the acquired rights; When a private legal entity is extinguished, the destination of its assets and liabilities is governed by its own statutes.

124
124. § 1 . For a legal act to be valid, it is required that it have been carried out by a capable person, and that the elements that essentially constitute that act are present, as well as the formalities and requirements imposed by law for the validity of the act.
§ 2 . The legal act duly carried out is presumed valid in terms of its external elements.

125
125. § 1 . The act that a person executes due to external violence that he has in no way been able to resist is considered to have not been carried out.
§ 2 . The act carried out due to serious fear unjustly instilled, or due to fraud, is valid, unless the law determines otherwise; but it can be rescinded by a judge's ruling, both at the request of the injured party or those who succeed him or her, or ex officio.

126
126. An act carried out through ignorance or error is void when it affects what constitutes its substance or falls on a sine qua non condition; Otherwise, it is valid, unless the law establishes otherwise, but the act carried out through ignorance or error may give rise to rescission action in accordance with the law.

127
127. § 1 . When the law establishes that, to carry out certain acts, the Superior needs the consent or advice of some college or group of people, the college or group must be convened in accordance with c. 166, unless, in the case of only asking for advice, the particular or proper law provides otherwise; For the validity of the acts, it is necessary to obtain the consent of the absolute majority of those present, or to ask for the advice of everyone.
§ 2 . When the law establishes that, to carry out certain acts, the Superior needs the consent or advice of some individual persons:
1 if consent is required, the act of the Superior is invalid if he does not ask for the consent of those people, or acts against the opinion of them or any of them;
2 if advice is required, the act of the Superior is invalid if he does not listen to those people: the Superior, although he has no obligation to follow that opinion, even if it is unanimous, should not nevertheless deviate from the opinion, especially if it is concordant, without a reason that, in his opinion, is more powerful.
§ 3 . All those whose consent or advice is required are obliged to sincerely express their opinion, and also, if the seriousness of the matter requires it, to carefully maintain secrecy, an obligation that the Superior may urge.

128
128. Anyone who illegitimately causes damage to another by a legal act or by another act carried out with intent or negligence is obliged to repair the damage caused.

129
129. § 1 . Of the power of regime, which exists in the Church by divine institution, and which is also called the power of jurisdiction, those sealed by the sacred order are capable subjects, in accordance with the norm of the prescriptions of law.
§ 2 . In the exercise of this power, the lay faithful can cooperate in accordance with the law.

130
130. The power of regime, in itself, is exercised in the external forum; However, sometimes it is exercised only in the internal forum, so that the effects that its exercise must have in the external forum are not recognized in this forum, unless the law establishes it in a specific case.

131
131. § 1 . The power of ordinary regime is that which is attached by itself to an office; A delegate is that which is granted to a person for himself, and not by reason of his office.
§ 2 . The ordinary power of regime can be own or vicarious.
§ 3 . The burden of proving delegation falls on the person who claims to be a delegate.

132
132. § 1 . The usual powers are governed by the provisions on delegated power.
§ 2 . However, if nothing else has been expressly provided for in the act of concession, nor has personal qualities been taken into account, the habitual power granted to an Ordinary is not extinguished when the power of the Ordinary to whom it has been granted ceases, even if he had already begun to exercise it, but passes to the Ordinary who succeeds him in the government.

133
133. § 1 . What a delegate does in excess of the limits of his mandate, with respect to the object or the people, is void.
§ 2 . A delegate who performs the acts for which he has received a delegation in a manner other than that determined in the mandate is not understood to exceed the limits of his mandate, unless the delegator has prescribed a certain manner for the validity of the act.

134
134. § 1 . By the name of Ordinary, in addition to the Roman Pontiff, the diocesan Bishops and all those who, even temporarily, have been appointed to govern a particular Church or a community equivalent to it according to c. 368, and also those who have ordinary executive power in them, that is, the Vicars General and Episcopalians; Likewise, with respect to their members, the major Superiors of clerical religious institutes of pontifical right and of clerical societies of apostolic life of pontifical right, who have, at least, ordinary executive power.
§ 2 . The name of Ordinary of the place is understood to mean all those listed in the § 1, except the Superiors of religious institutes and societies of apostolic life.
§ 3 . Whatever is nominally attributed in the canons to the diocesan Bishop in the area of ​​executive power, it is understood that it is the responsibility only of the diocesan Bishop and those who are equivalent to him according to c.

135
135. §1 . The power of the regime is divided into legislative, executive and judicial.
§ 2 . The legislative power must be exercised in the manner prescribed by law, and that which the lower legislator has cannot be validly delegated to the supreme authority, unless the law explicitly provides otherwise; Nor can the lower legislator validly give a law contrary to the law of higher rank.
§ 3 . The judicial power that judges or courts have must be exercised in the manner prescribed by law, and cannot be delegated, except to carry out the preparatory acts of a decree or sentence.
§ 4 . Regarding the exercise of executive power, observe the prescriptions of the canons that follow.

136
136. Executive power may be exercised, even when outside the territory, over one's own subjects, even if they are absent from the territory, if nothing else is established by the nature of the matter or by prescription of law; also on the pilgrims who are currently in the territory, if it is about granting favors or executing the universal laws and the particular ones that are obligatory for them according to the norm of c. 13 § 2, 2.

137
137. § 1 . Ordinary executive power can be delegated both for an act and for the generality of cases, unless the law expressly provides otherwise.
§ 2 . The executive power delegated by the Apostolic See can be subdelegated, both for an act and for the generality of cases, unless personal qualities have been taken into account, or subdelegation has been expressly prohibited.
§ 3 . Executive power delegated by another authority with ordinary power that was delegated for all matters can only be subdelegated for each case; but if it was delegated for a specific act or acts, it cannot be subdelegated without express concession from the delegator.
§ 4 . No subdelegated power can be subdelegated again, unless it has been expressly granted by the delegator.

138
138. The ordinary executive power, as well as that delegated for the generality of cases, must be interpreted broadly, but all others must be interpreted strictly; However, it is understood that whoever has delegated power is also granted everything necessary for that power to be exercised.

139
139. § 1 . If the law does not establish otherwise, the executive power, both ordinary and delegated, of a competent authority, is not suspended by the fact that someone goes to another competent authority, even if it is superior.
§ 2 . However, the lower authority does not interfere in a cause that has been brought to the higher authority, if it is not for a serious and urgent reason; in which case immediately report the matter to the higher authority.

140
140. § 1 . When several delegates for the same matter are jointly delegated, the one who begins to act excludes the action of the others in the same matter, unless he is later prevented or does not want to continue processing the matter.
§ 2 . When the various delegates for a matter are collegially, they must all proceed according to the norm of c. 119, unless otherwise provided in the mandate.
§ 3 . The executive power delegated to several is presumed to be jointly delegated.

141
141. When several have been successively delegated, the matter is resolved by the one whose mandate is previous, if it has not been subsequently revoked.

142
142. § 1 . The delegated power is extinguished: once the mandate has been fulfilled; the deadline has elapsed or the number of cases for which it was granted has been exhausted; having ceased the final cause of the delegation; by revocation of the delegator communicated directly to the delegate, and also by resignation of the delegate presented to the delegator and accepted by him; but it is not extinguished because the power of the delegator has ceased, unless this is stated in the clauses included in the mandate.
§ 2 . However, the act of delegated power that is exercised only in the domestic jurisdiction is valid even if, by inadvertence, it is carried out after the concession period has elapsed.
142. § 2 .
§ 2 . It also ceases if, with the passage of time, the actual circumstances have changed in the opinion of the competent authority in such a way that it is harmful, or its use becomes illegal.

143
143. § 1 . The ordinary power is extinguished by the loss of the office to which it is attached.
§ 2 . Unless the law provides otherwise, the ordinary power is suspended when an appeal is legitimately filed against the deprivation or removal of office.

144
144. § 1 . In the common error of fact or law, as well as in positive and probable doubt of law or fact, the Church supplies the executive power of the regime, both for the external and internal forum.
§ 2 . The same rule applies to the powers discussed in the ccs. 882, 883, 966 and

145
145. § 1 . Ecclesiastical office is any position, stably constituted by divine or ecclesiastical disposition, that must be exercised for a spiritual purpose.
§ 2 . The obligations and rights of each ecclesiastical office are determined either by the same law by which it is established, or by the decree of the competent authority that constitutes it and at the same time confers it.

146
146. An ecclesiastical office cannot be validly obtained without canonical provision.

147
147. The provision of an office is made through free collation by the competent ecclesiastical authority; by its institution when presentation has preceded; by confirmation or admission by the same when an election or nomination has preceded; finally, by simple choice and acceptance of the chosen one when the choice does not need to be confirmed.

148
148. The provision of offices is the responsibility of the same authority that is responsible for erecting, innovating or suppressing them, unless the law establishes otherwise.

149
149. § 1 . For someone to be promoted to an ecclesiastical office, they must be in communion with the Church and be suitable, that is, endowed with those qualities that are required for that office by universal or particular law, or by the founding law.
§ 2 . The provision of an ecclesiastical office made in favor of someone who lacks the required qualities is only invalid when such qualities are expressly required for the validity of the provision by universal or particular law, or by the law of foundation; Otherwise, it is valid, but can be rescinded by decree of the competent authority or by ruling of the administrative court.
§ 3 . The provision of an office made with simony is invalid by virtue of the law itself.

150
150. The office that entails the full care of souls, for whose fulfillment the exercise of the priestly order is required, cannot be validly conferred on someone who has not yet been elevated to the priesthood.

151
151. The provision of an office that involves the care of souls must not be delayed without serious cause.

152
152. No one is conferred with two or more incompatible offices, that is, they cannot be exercised at the same time by the same person.

153
153. § 1 . The provision of an office that, according to law, is not vacant, is ipso facto invalid, and is not validated by the subsequent vacancy.
§ 2 . However, if it is an office that, according to law, is conferred for a specific period of time, the provision can be made within the six months prior to the expiration of that period, and takes effect from the day of the vacation of the office.
§ 3 . The promise of an office, whoever makes it, does not produce any legal effect.

154
154. The vacant office according to law that someone holds illegitimately may be conferred on someone as long as it has been duly declared that said possession was not legitimate, and this declaration is mentioned in the collation document.

155
155. He who confers an office, replacing someone who was unable or neglected to do so, does not thereby acquire any power over the person to whom it has been conferred, but rather the legal status of the latter is the same as if the collation had been made according to the ordinary rule of law.

156
156. Record the provision of any office in writing.

157
157. Unless the law expressly establishes otherwise, it is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop to provide by free collation the ecclesiastical offices in his own particular Church.
157. 7 § 1 . Taking into account what the litigants have argued, the judge will determine by decree each of the issues that the expert's opinion must consider.
§ 2 . The minutes of the case and any other documents and gadgets that he may need to carry out his task well and faithfully must be delivered to the expert.
§ 3 . After hearing the expert, the judge will set a deadline within which he will have to carry out his study and present the opinion.

158
158. § 1 . The presentation for an ecclesiastical office by the person to whom the right of presentation belongs must be made to the authority to whom it corresponds to grant its institution, and if nothing else has been legitimately established, it will be done within a period of three months from when he became aware of the vacation of the office.
§ 2 . If the right of presentation belongs to a school or group of people, designate the one that is to be presented in accordance with the provisions of cc. 165-179.
158. § 1 and 161, as well as whoever presents an unsuitable person twice, loses for that occasion the right to present, and the vacant office must be freely provided to the competent authority to grant the institution, provided that the appointed Ordinary gives its consent.

159
159. No one is brought against his will; Therefore, the proposed candidate can be presented if, when asked about his will, he does not refuse within a period of eight working days.

160
160. § 1 . Whoever has the right to present may present one or more, both simultaneously and successively.
§ 2 . No one can introduce himself, but a school or group of people can introduce one of its members.

161
161. §1 . If the law does not establish otherwise, whoever has presented one who was not considered suitable, can only present another within a period of one month.
§ 2 . If the person presented resigns or dies before becoming his institution, whoever has the right of presentation can exercise it again within a period of one month from the moment in which he has received the news of the resignation or death.

162
162. Whoever does not make the presentation within the useful period, in accordance with the CC standard

163
163. The authority that, according to law, is responsible for instituting the person presented, will institute the person legitimately presented that it considers suitable, and that has accepted; If several are legitimately presented and considered suitable, one of them must be instituted.

164
164. If the law does not determine otherwise, in canonical elections the prescriptions of the canons that follow must be observed.

165
165. Unless the law or the legitimate statutes of the college or group provide otherwise, if a college or group has the right to elect for an office, it must not defer the election beyond one useful quarter, counting from the day on which it became aware of the vacation of the office; Once that period has elapsed unnecessarily, the ecclesiastical authority that has the right to confirm the election, or, alternatively, to fill, will freely fill the vacant office.

166
166. § 1 . The president of the college or group must convene all its members; and the call, when it must be personal, will be valid if it is made at the place of domicile, quasi-domicile or residence.
§ 2 . If any of those who were to be summoned had been absent, and therefore were absent, the election is valid; but at his request, after proving its pretermination and absence, the election must be rescinded by the competent authority, even after being confirmed, as long as it is legally established that the appeal was filed at least within three days after receiving the news of the election.
§ 3 . But if more than a third of the electors have been absent, the election is null and void, unless all those not summoned had in fact been present.

167
167. § 1 . Once the call has been legitimately made, those who are present at the place and on the day indicated in the call have the right to vote, excluding the right to vote by letter or by proxy, if the statutes do not legitimately provide otherwise.
§ 2 . If any of the electors is present at the house where the election is being held, but cannot attend due to illness, the tellers will collect their written vote.

168
168. Although someone has the right to vote in their own name for several Titles, they may only cast one vote.

169
169. For the election to be valid, no person outside the college or group can be admitted to vote.

170
170. The election whose freedom has been prevented for any reason is invalid in its own right.

171
171. § 1 . They are ineligible to vote:
1 the incapable of human acts;
2 who lacks an active voice;
3 the subject to a penalty of excommunication imposed by judicial sentence or by condemnatory or declaratory decree;
4 he who has notoriously separated himself from the communion of the Church.
§ 2 . If any of the above is admitted, his vote is null, but the election is valid, unless it is established that, without him, the person elected would not have obtained the necessary number of votes.

172
172. § 1 . For the vote to be valid, it must be:
1 free; Therefore, the vote of someone who, due to serious fear or fraud, directly or indirectly, was forced to elect a certain person or several disjunctively, is invalid;
2 secret, certain, absolute, determined.
§ 2 . The conditions added to the vote before the election are considered not set.

173
173. § 1 . Before beginning the election, at least two tellers must be appointed from among the members of the college or group.
§ 2 . The tellers must collect the votes and check with the election president whether the number of ballots corresponds to the number of voters, as well as examine the votes and make public how many each one has obtained.
§ 3 . If the number of votes is greater than the number of voters, the vote is void.
§ 4 . Whoever performs the function of actuary must carefully prepare minutes of the election, which, signed at least by the actuary, the president and the tellers, will be diligently kept in the college archive.

174
174. § 1 . The election, if the law or the statutes do not provide otherwise, may also be made by compromise, provided that the electors, after unanimous and written agreement, transfer for that time the right of election to one or more suitable persons, whether among their members or not, so that, by virtue of the power received, they can proceed to the election on behalf of all.
§ 2 . If it is a college or group formed only by clerics, the delegates must have been ordained; If not, the election is invalid.
§ 3 . The delegates must comply with the requirements of the law regarding the election and must adhere, for the validity of the election, to the conditions set in the commitment that are not contrary to the law; Conditions contrary to the law will be deemed not to have been established.
174. 1 The causes for which a parish priest can be legitimately removed from his parish are mainly the following:
1 a way of acting that produces serious detriment or disturbance to the ecclesiastical communion;
2 incompetence or a permanent illness of mind or body, which renders the parish priest incapable of usefully carrying out his duties;
3 the loss of good reputation in the eyes of honest and prudent parishioners or the aversion against the parish priest, if it is foreseen that they will not cease shortly;
4 serious negligence or transgression of parish duties, if it persists after a reprimand;
5 the poor administration of temporal goods with serious damage to the Church, when there is no other remedy for this evil.

175
175. The commitment ceases and the voters recover the right to vote:
1 for revocation made by the school or group, while the thing is intact;
2 for not having met any condition placed on the commitment;
3 once the election has been made, if it was void.

176
176. If nothing else is provided in the law or in the statutes, the person who has obtained the necessary number of votes, in accordance with the norm of c. 119, 1.

177
177. § 1 . The election must be immediately notified to the elected person, who, within eight business days after receiving the communication, must inform the president of the college or group whether or not he accepts the election; Otherwise, the election has no effect.
§ 2 . If the chosen one does not accept, he loses all rights acquired by the election and does not recover it by a subsequent acceptance, but he can be elected again; The school or group must proceed to a new election within one month of learning of the non-acceptance.
177. § 1 .
§ 3 . Whoever accepts the application that has been admitted, immediately obtains full office.

178
178. By accepting an election that does not need to be confirmed, the elected person immediately obtains full office; Otherwise, you only acquire a right to it.

179
179. § 1 . If the election needs to be confirmed, the person elected must request confirmation from the competent authority, by himself or by another, within a period of eight business days from the day of acceptance of the election; In other cases, he is deprived of all rights, unless he proves that due to just impediment it was not possible for him to request confirmation.
§ 2 . The competent authority, if it finds the chosen one suitable in accordance with the norm of c.149 § 1, and the election was made according to law, cannot deny confirmation.
§ 3 . Confirmation must be given in writing.
§ 4 . Before the confirmation is notified, the chosen one cannot interfere in the administration of the office, neither spiritually nor temporally, and the acts possibly put forward by him are null.
§ 5 . The elected person acquires the office by full right once confirmation has been notified, unless the law establishes otherwise.

180
180. §1 . If the election of the person considered most suitable and preferred by the voters is opposed by a canonical impediment that can and is usually waived, they can, by means of suffrage, nominate him or her to the competent authority, unless the law provides otherwise.
§ 2 . The delegates cannot make this nomination if they have not been expressly empowered in the commitment.

181
181. § 1 . For the nomination to be valid, at least two-thirds of the votes are required.
§ 2 . The vote for the nomination must be expressed through the word postulate or another equivalent; and the formula I elect or postulate, or another equivalent, is valid for the election if there is no impediment, and if there is, for the nomination.

182
182. § 1 . Within eight business days, the president must send the nomination to the competent authority whose responsibility it is to confirm the election and grant dispensation from the impediment, or request it, if he or she lacks this power, to the higher authority; When confirmation is not required, the application must be transmitted to the competent authority to grant the dispensation.
§ 2 . If the application is not sent within the established period, it is ipso facto null and void, and the school or group is deprived for that time of the right to elect or nominate, unless it is proven that the president did not send the application on time due to a just impediment or due to fraud or negligence.
§ 3 . Whoever has been nominated does not acquire any rights by virtue of the nomination; The competent authority has no obligation to admit it.
§ 4 . Voters cannot revoke the nomination made to the competent authority, if not with the latter's consent.

183
183. § 1 . If the application is not accepted by the competent authority, the right to choose returns to the school or group.
§ 2 . But if the application is admitted, the postulate will be notified, who must respond in accordance with the norm of c.

184
184. § 1 . The ecclesiastical office is lost due to the passage of the predetermined time, due to reaching the age determined by law, and due to resignation, transfer, removal or deprivation.
§ 2 . The ecclesiastical office is not lost when the right of the authority that conferred it ceases in any way, unless the law provides otherwise.
§ 3 . The loss of an office when it has been effective, must be notified as soon as possible to all those who have any right in the provision of the office.

185
185. The title of "emeritus" may be conferred on someone who has ceased to hold a position due to having reached the age of majority or due to an accepted resignation.

186
186. The loss of an office due to the expiration of the predetermined time or due to reaching the age of age only takes effect from the moment in which the competent authority notifies it in writing.

187
187. He who is of sound mind may, with just cause, renounce an ecclesiastical office.

188
188. A renunciation made due to serious fear unjustly caused, fraud, substantial error or simony is void by virtue of the law itself.

189
189. § 1 . For the resignation to be valid, whether its acceptance is required or not, it must be presented, in writing or orally before two witnesses, to the authority who is responsible for conferring the office in question.
§ 2 . The authority should not accept a resignation that is not based on a just and proportionate cause.
§ 3 . The resignation that requires acceptance does not have any effect if it is not accepted within a period of three months; The one that does not require acceptance produces its effect through the notification of the renouncer, made according to the rule of law.
§ 4 . As long as the resignation has not taken effect, it can be revoked by the renunciant; Once it has been produced, it cannot be revoked, but whoever resigns can obtain the office under another title.

190
190. § 1 . The transfer can only be done by someone who has the right to confer both the office that is lost and the one that is entrusted.
§ 2 . If the transfer is made against the will of the holder of the office, serious cause is required and, while the right to present contrary reasons remains, the procedure established by law must be observed.
§ 3 . For the transfer to take effect, it must be communicated in writing.

191
191. § 1 . In case of transfer, the first office becomes vacant with the canonical possession of the second, unless otherwise provided by law or prescribed by the competent authority.
§ 2 . The transferred person receives the remuneration corresponding to the first office, until he or she takes canonical possession of the second.

192
192. One is removed from an office, both by a legitimate decree given by the competent authority, without prejudice to the rights that could have been acquired by contract, and by the right itself in accordance with the norm of c. 194.

193
193. § 1 . No one can be removed from an office conferred for an indefinite period, except for serious causes and observing the procedure determined by law.
§ 2 . The same applies to those who received an office for a specific period of time, without prejudice to the provisions of c.

194
194. § 1 . The following are automatically removed from the ecclesiastical office:
1 who has lost the clerical state;
2 who has publicly departed from the Catholic faith or from the communion of the Church;
3 the clergyman who attempts to marry, even if it is only civil.
§ 2 . The removal discussed in nos. 2 and 3 can only be urged if it is confirmed by a declaration from the competent authority.

195
195. If someone is removed from an office with which he provided his support, not by law, but by decree of the competent authority, the same authority must ensure that it is provided for a time convenient to his support, unless it has been provided otherwise.

196
196. § 1 . Deprivation of office, as a penalty for a crime, can only be done according to the rule of law.
§ 2 . The deprivation produces effect as prescribed by the canons of criminal law.

197
197. The Church receives, as regulated in the civil legislation of the respective nation, prescription as a way of acquiring or losing a subjective right, as well as of freeing oneself from obligations, leaving aside the exceptions determined by the canons of this Code.

198
198. No prescription is valid if it is not based on good faith, not only at the beginning, but throughout the entire course of time required for it, except as established in c. 1362.

199
199. The following are not subject to prescription:
1 the rights and obligations that are of natural or positive divine law;
2 the rights that can only be obtained by apostolic privilege;
3 the rights and obligations that refer directly to the spiritual life of the faithful;
4 the certain and indubitable limits of the ecclesiastical circumscriptions;
5 the stipends and charges for Masses;
6 the provision of an ecclesiastical office which, by right, requires the exercise of holy orders;
7 the right of visit and the duty of obedience, the prescription of which would mean that the faithful could no longer be visited by any ecclesiastical authority, nor would they remain subject to any authority.

200
200. Unless the law expressly provides otherwise, time must be computed in accordance with the following canons.

201
201. § 1 . Continuous time means time that does not admit any interruption.
§ 2 . Useful time is understood to be that which concerns the person who uses or claims his right, in such a way that it does not run for those who do not know or cannot claim.

202
202. § 1 . In law, a day is understood to be the space of 24 hours counted as continuous, and begins at midnight, unless otherwise expressly provided; the week is a space of seven days; the month, a space of 30, and the year, a space of

203
203. § 1 . The day in question is not counted in the period, unless its beginning coincides with the beginning of the day or unless the law expressly provides otherwise.
§ 2 . Unless otherwise established, the ad quem day is included in the period, which, if it consists of one or more months or years, or one or more weeks, ends on the last day of the same number or, if the month does not have a day of the same number, on the end of the last day of the month.

204
204. § 1 . They are faithful Christians who, incorporated into Christ through baptism, are integrated into the people of God, and made participants in their own way for this reason in the priestly, prophetic and royal function of Christ, each one according to his own condition, are called to carry out the mission that God entrusted the Church to fulfill in the world.
§ 2 . This Church, constituted and ordered as a society in this world, subsists in the Catholic Church, governed by the successor of Peter and by the Bishops in communion with him.

205
205. Those baptized who are united to Christ within the visible structure of the Catholic Church in this land are in full communion with the Catholic Church, that is, through the bonds of the profession of faith, the sacraments and the ecclesiastical regime.

206
206. § 1 . In a special way, catechumens relate to the Church, that is, those who, moved by the Holy Spirit, explicitly request to be incorporated into it, and who by this same desire, as well as by the life of faith, hope and charity that they lead, are united to the Church, which already welcomes them as its own.
§ 2 . The Church pays special attention to catechumens and, while inviting them to lead an evangelical life and introducing them to the celebration of sacred rites, it already grants them some prerogatives typical of Christians.

207
207. § 1 . By divine institution, among the faithful there are sacred ministers in the Church, who in law are also called clerics; the rest are called laymen.
§ 2 . In these two groups there are faithful who, by the profession of the evangelical counsels through vows or other sacred bonds, recognized and sanctioned by the Church, consecrate themselves to God according to their own peculiar way and contribute to the saving mission of the Church; Their status, although it does not affect the hierarchical structure of the Church, nevertheless belongs to the life and sanctity of the Church.

208
208. Through their regeneration in Christ, there is true equality among all the faithful in terms of dignity and action, by virtue of which all, according to their own condition and office, cooperate in the building up of the Body of Christ.

209
209. § 1 . The faithful are obliged to always observe communion with the Church, even in their way of acting.
§ 2 . They fulfill with great diligence the duties they have both with respect to the universal Church and in relation to the particular Church to which they belong, according to the prescriptions of law.

210
210. All the faithful must strive, according to their own condition, to lead a holy life, as well as to increase the Church and promote its continued sanctification.

211
211. All the faithful have the duty and the right to work so that the divine message of salvation reaches more and more to men of all times and the entire world.

212
212. § 1 . The faithful, aware of their own responsibility, are obliged to follow, out of Christian obedience, everything that the sacred Shepherds, as representatives of Christ, declare as teachers of the faith or establish as rectors of the Church.
§ 2 . The faithful have the right to express their needs, mainly spiritual ones, and their desires to the Pastors of the Church.
§ 3 . They have the right, and sometimes even the duty, by reason of their own knowledge, competence and prestige, to express to the sacred Pastors their opinion on that which pertains to the good of the Church and to express it to the other faithful, always preserving the integrity of faith and customs, reverence towards the Pastors and taking into account the common usefulness and dignity of the people.

213
213. The faithful have the right to receive from the sacred Pastors the help of the spiritual goods of the Church, mainly the word of God and the sacraments.

214
214. The faithful have the right to worship God according to the norms of the rite itself approved by the legitimate Pastors of the Church, and to practice their own way of spiritual life, as long as it is in accordance with the doctrine of the Church.

215
215. The faithful have the right to freely found and direct associations for purposes of charity or piety, or to promote the Christian vocation in the world; and also to meet together to pursue those same goals in common.

216
216. All the faithful, since they participate in the mission of the Church, have the right to promote and sustain apostolic action also with their own initiatives, each according to their state and condition; but no initiative claims to be Catholic without the consent of the competent ecclesiastical authority.

217
217. The faithful, since they are called by baptism to lead a life consistent with evangelical doctrine, have the right to a Christian education through which they are appropriately instructed in order to achieve the maturity of the human person and at the same time know and live the mystery of salvation.

218
218. Those who dedicate themselves to the sacred sciences enjoy fair freedom to investigate, as well as to prudently express their opinion on everything in which they are experts, maintaining due submission to the teaching of the Church.

219
219. In choosing their state of life, all the faithful have the right to be immune from any coercion.

220
220. No one is allowed to illegitimately harm the good reputation that someone enjoys, nor violate the right of each person to protect their own privacy.

221
221. § 1 . It is up to the faithful to legitimately claim the rights they have in the Church, and defend them in the competent ecclesiastical forum in accordance with the rule of law.
§ 2 . If they are called to trial by the competent authority, the faithful also have the right to be judged according to legal norms, which must be applied fairly.
§ 3 . The faithful have the right not to be sanctioned with canonical penalties, if it is not in accordance with the legal norm.

222
222. § 1 . The faithful have the duty to help the Church in its needs, so that it has what is necessary for divine worship, works of apostolate and charity, and the appropriate sustenance of the ministers.
§ 2 . They also have the duty to promote social justice, as well as, remembering the Lord's precept, to help the poor with their own goods.

223
223. § 1 . In the exercise of their rights, both individually and united in associations, the faithful must take into account the common good of the Church, as well as the rights of others and their duties towards others.
§ 2 . It is up to the regular ecclesiastical authority, in attention to the common good, to exercise the rights of the faithful.

224
224. The lay faithful, in addition to the obligations and rights that are common to all Christian faithful and those established in other canons, have the obligations and rights that are enumerated in the canons of this title.

225
225. § 1 . Since, by virtue of baptism and confirmation, the laity, like all other faithful, are destined by God to the apostolate, they have the general obligation, and enjoy the right both personally and associatively, to work so that the divine message of salvation is known and received by all men throughout the world; obligation that presses them even more in those circumstances in which only through them can men hear the Gospel and know Jesus Christ.
§ 2 . They also have the peculiar duty, each according to their own condition, to permeate and perfect the temporal order with the evangelical spirit, and thus bear witness to Christ, especially in the accomplishment of those same temporal things and in the exercise of secular tasks.

226
226. § 1 . Those who, according to their own vocation, live in the married state, have the peculiar duty of working to build up the people of God through marriage and the family.
§ 2 . For having transmitted life to their children, parents have the very serious duty and right to educate them; Therefore, it is up to Christian parents in the first place to ensure the Christian education of their children according to the doctrine taught by the Church.

227
227. The lay faithful have the right to be recognized in earthly matters that freedom that belongs to all citizens; However, when using this freedom, they must ensure that their actions are inspired by the evangelical spirit, and they must pay attention to the doctrine proposed by the Magisterium of the Church, avoiding at the same time presenting their own criteria as the doctrine of the Church, in matters of opinion.

228
228. § 1 . Lay people who are considered suitable have the capacity to be called by the sacred Pastors for those ecclesiastical offices and assignments that they can fulfill according to the prescriptions of the law.
§ 2 . Lay people who are distinguished by their science, prudence and integrity have the capacity to help the Pastors of the Church as experts and advisors, also being part of councils, in accordance with the rule of law.

229
229. § 1 . So that they can live according to the Christian doctrine, proclaim it, defend it when necessary and exercise their corresponding part in the apostolate, the laity have the duty and the right to acquire knowledge of that doctrine, according to the capacity and condition of each one.
§ 2 . They also have the right to acquire the most profound knowledge of the sacred sciences taught in universities or ecclesiastical faculties or in institutes of religious sciences, by attending their classes and obtaining academic degrees.
§ 3 . Adhering to the established prescriptions on the necessary suitability, they also have the capacity to receive from the legitimate ecclesiastical authority a mandate to teach sacred sciences.

230
230. § 1 . n Lay people who have the age and conditions determined by decree of the Episcopal Conference, may be called to the stable ministry of reader and acolyte, through the prescribed liturgical rite; However, the collation of these ministries does not give them the right to be supported or remunerated by the Church.
§ 2 . By temporary assignment, lay people can perform the role of reader in liturgical ceremonies; Likewise, all lay people can perform the functions of commentator, singer and others, in accordance with the rule of law.
§ 3 . Where the need of the Church advises it and there are no ministers, lay people, even if they are not readers or acolytes, may also supply them in some of their functions, that is, exercising the ministry of the word, presiding over liturgical prayers, administering baptism and giving Holy Communion, according to the prescriptions of law.
230. § 1, have the right to adequate remuneration that responds to their condition, and with which they can decently provide for their own needs and those of their family, also in accordance with the prescriptions of civil law; and they also have the right to have their pension and social security and so-called health care duly provided for.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Spiritus Domini of January 10, 2021)]:
230. § 1 . Lay men who have the age and conditions determined by decree of the Episcopal Conference, may be called to the stable ministry of reader and acolyte, through the prescribed liturgical rite; However, the collation of these ministries does not give them the right to be supported or remunerated by the Church.
230. § 3 .

231
231. § 1 . Lay people who permanently or temporarily dedicate themselves to a special service of the Church have the duty to acquire the appropriate training required to perform their role well, and to exercise it with conscience, generosity and diligence.
§ 2 . Maintaining what is prescribed in c.

232
232. The Church has the duty, and the proper and exclusive right, to train those who are destined for sacred ministries.

233
233. § 1 . It is the duty of the entire Christian community to encourage vocations, so that the needs of the sacred ministry in the entire Church are sufficiently provided for; This duty especially obliges Christian families, educators and, in a peculiar way, priests, especially parish priests. The diocesan Bishops, whose responsibility it is to ensure that vocations are promoted, instruct the people entrusted to them about the greatness of the sacred ministry and the need for ministers in the Church, promote and sustain initiatives to encourage vocations, especially through the works that already exist for this purpose.
§ 2 . Priests, and more specifically diocesan Bishops, should also have special interest in ensuring that those men of mature age who feel called to sacred ministries are helped with prudence, in word and deed, and that those men of mature age who feel called to sacred ministries are adequately prepared.

234
234. § 1 . Minor seminaries and other similar institutions should be preserved where they exist and encouraged, in which, in order to promote vocations, a peculiar religious formation is given, along with humanistic and scientific teaching; and it is even convenient for the diocesan Bishop, where he considers it appropriate, to provide for the erection of a minor seminary or a similar institution.
§ 2 . Unless, in certain cases, circumstances dictate otherwise, young people who wish to reach the priesthood must be equipped with the humanistic and scientific training with which young people from their own region prepare to pursue higher studies.

235
235. § 1 . Young people who wish to reach the priesthood must receive both the appropriate spiritual formation and that which is adequate for the fulfillment of the duties of the priesthood in the major seminary, during the entire time of formation or, at least, for four years, if in the opinion of the diocesan Bishop circumstances so require.
§ 2 . For those who legitimately reside outside the seminary, the diocesan Bishop must entrust a pious and suitable priest to ensure that they are diligently formed in spiritual life and discipline.

236
236. Those who aspire to the permanent diaconate must be formed according to the prescriptions of the Episcopal Conference so that they cultivate the spiritual life and carry out with dignity the offices of that order:
1 young people, staying at least three years in a residence intended for that purpose, unless the diocesan Bishop determines otherwise for serious reasons;
2 men of mature age, both celibate and married, according to the three-year plan established by the Episcopal Conference.

237
237. § 1 . In each diocese, when possible and convenient, there must be a major seminary; Otherwise, the students to prepare for sacred ministries will be entrusted to another seminary, or an interdiocesan seminary will be erected.
§ 2 . n An interdiocesan seminary must not be erected without the Episcopal Conference, in the case of a seminary for its entire territory, or, otherwise, the interested Bishops having first obtained confirmation from the Apostolic See, both of the erection of the seminary itself and of its statutes.
237. § 2 An interdiocesan seminary should not be erected without the Episcopal Conference, when it is a seminary for its entire territory, or otherwise the interested Bishops, having first obtained the approval of the Apostolic See, both for the erection of the seminary itself and for its statutes.

238
238. § 1 . Legitimately erected seminaries have by law legal personality in the Church.
§ 2 . The rector represents the seminary in all matters, unless the competent authority has established otherwise for some of them.

239
239. § 1 . Throughout the seminary there must be a rector who is in charge and, if necessary, a vice-rector, a treasurer and, if the students study in the same seminary, also professors who teach the different subjects in a coordinated manner.
§ 2 . In every seminary there must be at least one spiritual director, although the students are free to go to other priests who have been designated by the Bishop for this function.
§ 3 . The seminary's statutes must determine the way in which the other directors, professors and even the students participate in the rector's responsibility, especially with regard to maintaining discipline.

240
240. § 1 . In addition to the ordinary confessors, other confessors go regularly to the seminary; and, keeping the discipline of the center safe, students will also always be able to address any confessor, both in the seminary and outside of it.
§ 2 . You can never ask the opinion of the spiritual director or the confessors when deciding on the admission of students to the orders or on their departure from the seminary.

241
241. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop must only admit to the major seminary those who, taking into account their human and moral, spiritual and intellectual gifts, their physical health and their psychological balance, and their right intention, are considered capable of dedicating themselves to the sacred ministries in perpetuity.
§ 2 . Before being admitted, they must present the baptism and confirmation certificates, as well as the other documents required in accordance with the prescriptions of the Priestly Formation Plan.
§ 3 . When it comes to admitting those who have been dismissed from another seminary or a religious institute, a report from the respective superior is also required, especially regarding the cause of their expulsion or departure.

242
242. § 1 . n In each nation there must be a Plan for priestly formation, which will be established by the Episcopal Conference, taking into account the norms given by the supreme authority of the Church, and which must be confirmed by the Holy See; and it must adapt to new circumstances, also with the confirmation of the Holy See; This Plan will establish the general principles and norms, adapted to the pastoral needs of each region or province.
§ 2 . The norms of the Plan referred to in § 1 must be observed in all seminaries, both diocesan and interdiocesan.
242. § 1 . In each nation there must be a Plan for priestly formation, which will be established by the Episcopal Conference, keeping in mind the norms given by the supreme authority of the Church, and which must be approved by the Holy See; and it must adapt to new circumstances, also with the approval of the Holy See; This Plan will establish the general principles and norms, adapted to the pastoral needs of each region or province.

243
243. Each seminary will also have its own regulations, approved by the diocesan Bishop, or by the interested Bishops if it is an interdiocesan seminary, in which the norms of the Priestly Formation Plan are adapted to the particular circumstances, and the aspects, especially disciplinary, that refer to the daily life of the students and the order of the entire seminary are determined more precisely.

244
244. The spiritual formation and doctrinal preparation of the students in the seminary should be in perfect harmony, and their goal should be that they, according to the character of each one, achieve, along with due human maturity, the spirit of the Gospel and a close relationship with Christ.

245
245. § 1 . Through spiritual formation, students must become qualified to exercise the pastoral ministry profitably and must acquire a missionary spirit, persuading themselves that the ministry, always carried out with living faith and charity, contributes to their own sanctification; and also learn to cultivate those virtues that are most appreciable in human coexistence, so that they can adequately reconcile human and supernatural goods.
§ 2 . The students must be formed so that, full of love for the Church of Christ, they are united with humble and filial charity to the Roman Pontiff, successor of Peter, they adhere to the Bishop himself as faithful cooperators and work together with their brothers; Through life in common in the seminary and the bonds of friendship and understanding with others, they must prepare for a fraternal union with the diocesan presbytery, of which they will be members for the service of the Church.

246
246. § 1 . The Eucharistic celebration is the center of the entire life of the seminary, so that daily, participating in the charity of Christ, the students draw strength above all from this very rich source for their apostolic work and for their spiritual life.
§ 2 . They must be trained for the celebration of the liturgy of the hours, through which the ministers of God pray to the Lord on behalf of the Church for the people entrusted to them and for the entire world.
§ 3 . The cult of the Blessed Virgin Mary should be encouraged, including through the recitation of the holy rosary, mental prayer and other practices of piety with which students acquire the spirit of prayer and are strengthened in their vocation.
§ 4 . Students should get into the habit of attending the sacrament of penance frequently, and it is recommended that each one have a spiritual director, freely chosen, to whom they can open their soul with complete confidence.
§ 5 . The students will do spiritual exercises every year.

247
247. § 1 . By means of adequate training, the students should be prepared to observe the state of celibacy, and learn to hold it in high esteem as a peculiar gift of God.
§ 2 . Students must be made aware of the obligations and burdens of sacred ministers, without hiding from them any of the difficulties that priestly life entails.

248
248. The doctrinal training to be imparted must aim to ensure that the students, together with the general culture appropriate to the needs of the time and place, acquire a broad and solid knowledge of the sacred disciplines, so that, by founding and nurturing their own faith in them, they can conveniently announce the doctrine of the Gospel to the men of their time, in a manner appropriate to their mentality.

249
249. The Priestly Formation Plan must provide that the students are not only carefully instructed in their own language, but also that they master the Latin language, and also acquire that convenient knowledge of other languages that is necessary or useful for their formation or for the pastoral ministry.

250
250. The philosophical and theological studies provided for in the seminary can be done successively or simultaneously, in accordance with the Priestly Formation Plan; and they must last at least six years, so that the time allocated to philosophical subjects comprises a biennium and that corresponding to theological studies is equivalent to a quadrennium.

251
251. Philosophical training, which must be based on the heritage of perennial philosophy and take into account at the same time the philosophical research carried out with the progress of time, must be given in a way that completes the human formation of the students, contributes to sharpening their minds and prepares them so that they can better carry out their theological studies.

252
252. §1 . Theological training, in the light of faith and under the guidance of the Magisterium, must be given in such a way that students know all Catholic doctrine, founded on divine Revelation, make it food for their own spiritual life and know how to communicate and defend it appropriately in the exercise of their ministry.
§ 2 . Students must be trained with particular diligence in sacred Scripture, so that they acquire a complete vision of all of it.
§ 3 . There must be classes of dogmatic theology, always based on the written word of God, together with sacred Tradition, with which students know in a deeper way the mysteries of salvation, having Saint Thomas mainly as a teacher; and also classes in moral and pastoral theology, canon law, liturgy, ecclesiastical history and other auxiliary and special disciplines, in accordance with the norms of the Priestly Formation Plan.

253
253. § 1 . For the position of professor of philosophical, theological and legal disciplines, the Bishop or Bishops concerned will appoint only those who, standing out for their virtues, have obtained a doctorate or bachelor's degree from a university or faculty recognized by the Holy See.
§ 2 . Efforts should be made to appoint different professors for sacred Scripture, dogmatic theology, moral theology, liturgy, philosophy, canon law, ecclesiastical history and for the other disciplines, which must be explained according to their own methods.
§ 3 . A teacher who seriously fails to fulfill his or her position must be removed by the authority mentioned in the § 1.

254
254. § 1 . In teaching, teachers must constantly pay special attention to the intimate unity and harmony of the entire doctrine of the faith, so that students understand that they are learning a unique science; To better achieve this, there must be someone in the seminary who directs the entire organization of the studies.
§ 2 . Teach students in such a way that they become capable of examining questions with a scientific method through appropriate investigations carried out by themselves; There will, therefore, be exercises in which, under the direction of the teachers, students learn to carry out studies with their own work.

255
255. Although all the training of students in the seminary has a pastoral purpose, specifically pastoral instruction must be given in it, with which, also attending to the needs of the place and time, the students learn the principles and methods proper to the ministry of teaching, sanctifying and governing the people of God.

256
256. § 1 . Students should be diligently trained in that which in a peculiar way refers to the sacred ministry, especially in the practice of the catechetical and homiletic method, in divine worship and in a peculiar way in the celebration of the sacraments, in dealing with men, also with non-Catholics or non-believers, in the administration of a parish and in the fulfillment of other tasks.
§ 2 . Students should be taught the needs of the universal Church, so that they may be solicitous in promoting vocations, for missionary, ecumenical tasks and those others, including social ones, that are more urgent.

257
257. § 1 . The formation of the students must be carried out in such a way that they feel interested not only in the particular Church in whose service they are incardinated but also in the universal Church, and they are willing to dedicate themselves to those particular Churches that are in serious need.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop must ensure that clerics who wish to move from their own particular Church to a particular Church in another region are suitably prepared to carry out the sacred ministry there, that is, that they learn the language of that region and become familiar with its institutions, social conditions, uses and customs.

258
258. So that they also learn in practice the method of carrying out the apostolate, the students, during the period of study but mainly during vacations, must be initiated in pastoral practice, through the appropriate tasks to be determined by the Ordinary, appropriate to the age of the students and the circumstances of the place, always under the direction of an expert priest.

259
259. § 1 . It is up to the diocesan Bishop, or the interested Bishops in the case of an interdiocesan seminary, to decide what refers to the superior regime and administration of the seminary.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop, or the Bishops concerned if it is an interdiocesan seminary, personally and frequently visit the seminary, supervise the formation of its students and the teaching of philosophical and theological subjects, and obtain knowledge of the vocation, character, piety and achievement of the students, especially with a view to conferring sacred orders on them.

260
260. In carrying out their own tasks, everyone must obey the rector, who is responsible for the immediate direction of the seminary in accordance always with the Priestly Formation Plan and the regulations of the seminary.

261
261. §1 . The rector of the seminary, and also, under his authority and to the extent that is their responsibility, the superiors and professors must ensure that the students perfectly comply with the norms established in the Priestly Formation Plan and in the regulations of the seminary.
§ 2 . The rector of the seminary and the director of studies should diligently ensure that the professors properly carry out their task, according to the prescriptions of the Priestly Formation Plan and the regulations of the seminary.

262
262. The seminary is exempt from the parish regime; and it is the rector or his delegate who performs the function of parish priest for all those who are in the seminary except what refers to marriage and without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 985.

263
263. The diocesan Bishop or, in the case of an interdiocesan seminary, the interested Bishops, with a quota determined by common agreement, must contribute to the establishment and maintenance of the seminary, to the support of the students, to the remuneration of the teachers and to other needs of the seminary.

264
264. §1 . To provide for the needs of the seminary, in addition to the collection discussed in c. 1266, the Bishop can impose a tribute in his diocese.
§ 2 . All ecclesiastical legal entities, including private ones, that have their headquarters in the diocese are subject to the tribute in favor of the seminary, unless they are supported only by alms or there is actually a school of students or teachers that aims to promote the common good of the Church; This tribute must be general, proportionate to the income of those who must pay it and determined according to the needs of the seminary.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio of February 11, 2022)]:

265
265. n It is necessary that every cleric be incardinated in a particular Church or in a personal prelature, or in an institute of consecrated life or in a society that enjoys this faculty, or also in a public clerical association that has obtained such faculty from the Apostolic See, so that headless or lazy clerics are in no way admitted.
265. It is necessary that every cleric be incardinated in a particular Church or in a personal prelature, or in an institute of consecrated life or in a society that enjoys this faculty, so that headless or lazy clerics are in no way admitted.

266
266. § 1 . By receiving the diaconate, one becomes a clergyman and is incardinated in a particular Church or in a personal prelature for whose service he was promoted.
§ 2 . The professed member with perpetual vows in a religious institute or definitively incorporated into a clerical society of apostolic life, upon receiving the diaconate, is incardinated as a clergyman in that institute or society, unless, as regards societies, the constitutions say otherwise.
§3 . By receiving the diaconate, the member of a secular institute is incardinated in the particular Church for whose service he has been promoted, unless, by concession of the Apostolic See, he is incardinated in the same institute.
266. § 2, is excardinated from his own particular Church, by perpetual or definitive admission into the institute of consecrated life or into the society of apostolic life
266. § 1, if they are destined for works specific to the institute or its government, they depend on the Bishop in the same way as the religious.

267
267. § 1 . For an already incardinated cleric to be validly incardinated in another particular Church, he must obtain from his diocesan Bishop letters of excardination signed by him, and likewise the letters of incardination signed by the diocesan Bishop of the particular Church in which he wishes to be incardinated.
§ 2 . The excardination granted in this way has no effect if incardination in another particular Church has not been achieved.

268
268. § 1 . The clergyman who has legitimately transferred from his own to another particular Church is incardinated into it by virtue of the same right after a five-year period has elapsed if he expresses this desire in writing both to the diocesan Bishop of the Church that welcomed him and to his own diocesan Bishop, and neither of them has communicated his refusal in writing, within a period of four months from the moment in which they received the request.
§ 2 . The cleric who is incardinated into an institute or society in accordance with the norm of c.

269
269. The diocesan Bishop must not proceed with the incardination of a clergyman unless:
1 the need or usefulness of his particular Church requires it, and the prescriptions of law that refer to the honest support of clerics remain safe;
2 he is certified by a legitimate document that the excardination has been granted and has also obtained, if necessary under secrecy, the appropriate reports from the diocesan Bishop who grants the excardination, about the life, conduct and studies of the clergyman in question;
3 the clergyman has declared in writing to the same diocesan Bishop that he wishes to be assigned to the service of the new particular Church, in accordance with the law.

270
270. Excardination can only be licitly granted with just causes, such as the usefulness of the Church or the good of the clergyman himself; and it cannot be denied unless there are serious causes, but in this case, the cleric who considers himself harmed and has found a Bishop willing to receive him, can appeal against the decision.

271
271. § 1 . Outside of the case of true need of the particular Church itself, the diocesan Bishop must not deny permission to transfer to another place to the clerics whom he knows are willing and consider suitable to go to regions that suffer a serious shortage of clergy to carry out the sacred ministry there; but provide so that, by written agreement with the diocesan Bishop of the place where they will go, the rights and duties of those clerics are determined.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop may grant his clergy a license to move to another particular Church for a certain period of time, which may be renewed successively, in such a way, however, that these clerics remain incardinated in the particular Church itself and, upon returning, have all the rights that would correspond to them if they had dedicated themselves to the sacred ministry there.
§ 3 . The cleric who legitimately passes to another particular Church, remaining incardinated to his own Church, can be called with just cause by his own diocesan Bishop, as long as the agreements agreed upon with the other Bishop and natural equity are observed; Likewise, and complying with the same conditions, the diocesan Bishop of the other particular Church may deny with just cause to that clergyman the license to continue remaining in his own territory.

272
272. The diocesan Administrator cannot grant excardination or incardination, nor the license to transfer to another particular Church, unless one year has passed since the episcopal see became vacant, and with the consent of the college of consultants.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Competentias quasdam decernere of February 11, 2022)]:

273
273. Clerics have a special obligation to show respect and obedience to the Supreme Pontiff and his own Ordinary.

274
274. § 1 . Only clerics can obtain offices for the exercise of which the power of order or the power of ecclesiastical regime is required.
§ 2 . Unless excused by a legitimate impediment, clerics must accept and faithfully perform the task entrusted to them by their Ordinary.

275
275. §1 . The clerics, since they all work in the same work, the building of the Body of Christ, are united among themselves with the bond of fraternity and prayer, and encourage mutual cooperation, according to the prescriptions of particular law.
§ 2 . Clergy must recognize and promote the mission that, for their part, the laity exercise in the Church and in the world.

276
276. §1 . The clerics, in their own conduct, are obliged to seek holiness for a peculiar reason, since, consecrated to God by a new title in the reception of orders, they are administrators of the mysteries of the Lord in the service of his people.
§ 2 . In order to achieve this perfection:
1 carry out, above all, faithfully and tirelessly the tasks of the pastoral ministry;
2 nourish your spiritual life at the double table of sacred Scripture and the Eucharist; Therefore, priests are strongly invited to offer the Eucharistic Sacrifice every day, and deacons to participate daily in the same oblation;
3 priests and deacons who wish to receive the priesthood have the obligation to celebrate the liturgy of the hours every day according to their own and approved liturgical books; and the permanent deacons must pray that part determined by the Episcopal Conference;
4 are also obliged to attend spiritual retreats, according to the prescriptions of particular law;
5, it is recommended that they perform mental prayer every day, frequently access the sacrament of penance, have a special veneration for the Virgin Mother of God and practice other means of sanctification, both common and particular.
276. § 2, 3, and they will perform other exercises of piety.
§ 4 . They will pay a special cult, also through the recitation of the holy rosary, to the Virgin Mother of God, model and protection of all consecrated life.
§ 5 They will faithfully observe the annual times of spiritual retreat.
276. § 2 , 3; and to the members of the institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life, in accordance with their constitutions.
§ 2 . The other faithful are also strongly invited to, depending on the circumstances, participate in the Liturgy of the Hours, since it is the action of the Church.

277
277. § 1 . The clergy are bound to observe perfect and perpetual continence for the sake of the Kingdom of heaven, and are therefore bound to observe celibacy, which is a peculiar gift of God by which sacred ministers can more easily unite themselves to Christ with a whole heart, and dedicate themselves more freely to the service of God and men.
§ 2 . Clergy must exercise due caution in relation to those whose treatment may jeopardize their obligation to maintain continence or cause scandal to the faithful.
§ 3 . It is up to the diocesan Bishop to establish more specific norms on this matter and to issue a judgment in particular cases on the fulfillment of this obligation.

278
278. § 1 . Secular clerics have the right to associate with others to achieve ends that are in accordance with the clerical state.
§ 2 . Secular clerics must especially hold in high esteem those associations that, with statutes reviewed by the competent authority, through an adequate and appropriately approved plan of life as well as through fraternal help, encourage the search for holiness in the exercise of ministry and contribute to the union of clerics among themselves and with their own Bishop.
§ 3 . Clergymen must refrain from forming or participating in associations whose purpose or actions are incompatible with the obligations of the clerical state or may be an obstacle to the diligent fulfillment of the task entrusted to them by the competent ecclesiastical authority.

279
279. § 1 . Even after receiving the priesthood, clerics must continue sacred studies, and must profess that solid doctrine founded on sacred Scripture, transmitted by the elders and received as common in the Church, as determined above all in the documents of the Councils and the Roman Pontiffs; avoiding profane innovations of terminology and false science.
§ 2 . According to the prescriptions of particular law, priests, after ordination, must frequently attend the pastoral lessons that must be established, as well as other lessons, theological meetings or conferences, at times also determined by the same particular law, through which they are offered the opportunity to deepen their knowledge of sacred sciences and pastoral methods.
§ 3 . They should also try to know other sciences, especially those that are connected with the sacred, mainly to the extent that this knowledge helps the exercise of pastoral ministry.
279. § 2 ;
2 Take care that the priests of your district do not lack spiritual means, and be especially solicitous of those who find themselves in difficult circumstances or who are overwhelmed by problems.
§ 3 . The archpriest should ensure that the parish priests of his district who he knows are seriously ill do not lack spiritual and material aid, and that the funeral of those who die is celebrated with dignity; and also provide that, when they become ill or die, the books, documents, sacred objects and ornaments or other things belonging to the Church do not perish or are removed from their place.
§ 4 . The archpriest has the duty to visit the parishes in his district, as determined by the diocesan Bishop.

280
280. Clergy are strongly advised to have a certain life in common, which, as far as possible, must be preserved wherever it is in force.

281
281. § 1 . Clergymen dedicated to ecclesiastical ministry deserve remuneration appropriate to their condition, taking into account both the nature of the office they perform and the circumstances of the place and time, so that they can provide for their own needs and the fair remuneration of those people whose service they need.
§ 2 . Care must also be taken to ensure that they enjoy social assistance, through which their needs are adequately provided for in the event of illness, disability or old age.
§ 3 . Married deacons fully dedicated to ecclesiastical ministry deserve such compensation that they can support themselves and their families; But those who, for exercising or having exercised a civil profession, already receive remuneration, must provide for their own needs and those of their family with what they earn for that title.
281. to the support of clerics who provide service in the diocese, unless another way of meeting this requirement has been established.
§ 2 . Where social security for the clergy is not yet adequately organized, the Episcopal Conference should ensure that there is an institution that sufficiently provides for the social security of the clergy.
§ 3 . Let there be established in each diocese, to the extent necessary, a common mass, with which the Bishops can fulfill their obligations towards other people who serve the Church and meet the different needs of the diocese, and by which the richest dioceses can also help the poorest.
§ 4 . Depending on the circumstances of each place, the purposes discussed in §§ 2 and 3 can be best achieved through diocesan institutions federated among themselves, or through cooperation, and even by an association agreed upon between several dioceses or constituted for the entire territory of the same Episcopal Conference.
§ 5 . If possible, these institutions should be constituted in such a way that they obtain effectiveness even before the civil order.

282
282. § 1 . Clergymen must live simply and abstain from everything that seems vanity.
§ 2 . They voluntarily allocate to the good of the Church and to works of charity the surplus of those goods that they receive on the occasion of the exercise of an ecclesiastical office, once they have provided with them for their honest support and the fulfillment of all the obligations of their state.

283
283. § 1 . Even if they do not have a residential office, clerics must not leave their diocese for a significant period of time, which will be determined by particular law, without at least presumed permission from the Ordinary himself.
§ 2 . It is also the responsibility of clergy to have adequate and sufficient vacation time every year, determined by universal or particular law.

284
284. Clergy must wear dignified ecclesiastical dress, according to the norms given by the Episcopal Conference and the legitimate customs of the place.

285
285. § 1 . Clergymen should abstain completely from anything that discredits their state, according to the prescriptions of particular law.
§ 2 . Clergymen must avoid those things that, although not indecorous, are foreign to the clerical state.
§ 3 . Clergymen are prohibited from accepting those public positions that involve participation in the exercise of civil power.
§ 4 . Without permission from their Ordinary, they must not accept the administration of property belonging to lay people or secular offices that carry with them the obligation to render accounts; They are prohibited from being guarantors even with their own property, without having consulted their own Ordinary; and they must refrain from signing documents in which the obligation to pay an amount of money is assumed without specifying the cause.
285. §§ 3 and 4, 286, 287 § 2, do not bind permanent deacons.

286
286. Clergymen are prohibited from engaging in negotiation or commerce without license from the legitimate ecclesiastical authority, both personally and through others, whether for their own benefit or that of third parties.

287
287. § 1 . Let clerics always encourage, as much as possible, that peace and concord founded on justice be preserved among men.
§ 2 . They must not actively participate in political parties or in the leadership of trade union associations, unless, according to the judgment of the competent ecclesiastical authority, the defense of the rights of the Church or the promotion of the common good requires it.
287. and 289, and to those who are clerics, also those of c. 279 § 2 ; in lay institutes of pontifical right, the license referred to in c. 285 § 4, can be granted by the Major Superior himself.

288
288. Unless particular law establishes otherwise, the prescriptions of cc. 284,

289
289. § 1 . Since military service is less congruent with the clerical state, clerics and also candidates for sacred orders do not volunteer for military service, except with the permission of their Ordinary.
§ 2 . Clergy must also make use of the exemptions granted to them by laws and conventions or customs, in order not to exercise public civil positions and offices outside the clerical state, unless the Ordinary itself determines otherwise in particular cases.

290
290. Once validly received, sacred ordination is never annulled. However, a clergyman loses clerical status:
1 by judicial ruling or administrative decree, in which the invalidity of the sacred ordination is declared;
2 for the legitimately imposed resignation penalty;
3 by rescript of the Apostolic See, which is only granted, by the Apostolic See, to deacons, when there are serious causes; to priests, for very serious reasons.

291
291. Outside of the cases referred to in c. 290, 1, the loss of the clerical state does not entail the dispensation from the obligation of celibacy, which only the Roman Pontiff grants.

292
292. The cleric who, in accordance with the rule of law, loses the clerical state, loses with it the rights inherent to that state, and is no longer subject to the obligations of the clerical state, without prejudice to the provisions of c. 291; He is prohibited from exercising the power of order, except as established in c. 976; For this reason, he is deprived of all offices, functions and any delegated power.

293
293. The cleric who has lost the clerical state cannot be assigned again among the clerics, except by rescript of the Apostolic See.

294
294. In order to promote a convenient distribution of priests or to carry out peculiar pastoral or missionary works in favor of various regions or diverse social groups, the Apostolic See, after hearing the interested Episcopal Conferences, may erect personal prelatures consisting of priests and deacons of the secular clergy.

295
295. § 1 . The personal prelature is governed by the statutes given by the Apostolic See and its government is entrusted to a Prelate as its own Ordinary, who has the power to erect a national or international seminary as well as incardinate students and promote them to the orders as a service to the prelature.
§ 2 . The Prelate must take care of the spiritual formation of those ordained with the aforementioned title as well as their appropriate sustenance.

296
296. Through agreements established with the prelature, lay people can dedicate themselves to the apostolic works of the personal prelature; But the mode of this organic cooperation and the main duties and rights attached to it must be adequately determined in the statutes.

297
297. The statutes will determine the relations of the personal prelature with the local Ordinaries of those particular Churches in which the prelature exercises or wishes to exercise its pastoral or missionary works, prior to the consent of the diocesan Bishop.
_________________________________________

298
298. § 1 . There are associations in the Church other than institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life, in which the faithful, clergy or laity, or clerics together with lay people, working together, seek to foster a more perfect life, promote public worship, or Christian doctrine, or carry out other apostolate activities, namely, initiatives for evangelization, the exercise of works of piety or charity, and the animation of the temporal order in a Christian spirit.
§ 2 . The faithful should preferably register in those associations that have been established, praised or recommended by the competent ecclesiastical authority.
298. § 1, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 301 § 1 .
§ 2 . These associations are called private even though they have been praised or recommended by ecclesiastical authority.
§ 3 . No private association is admitted into the Church if its statutes have not been reviewed by the competent authority.

299
299. § 1 . The faithful have the right, by private agreement among themselves, to establish associations for the purposes referred to in the c

300
300. No association can call itself "Catholic" without the consent of the competent authority, in accordance with the norm of c. 312.

301
301. § 1 . It is exclusively the responsibility of the competent ecclesiastical authority to establish associations of the faithful that propose to transmit Christian doctrine in the name of the Church, or promote public worship, or that pursue other purposes reserved by their very nature to the ecclesiastical authority.
§ 2 . If it considers it appropriate, the competent ecclesiastical authority may also establish associations that directly or indirectly seek to achieve other spiritual goals, which are not sufficiently provided for by private initiative.
§ 3 . The associations of faithful erected by the competent ecclesiastical authority are called public associations.

302
302. Those associations of faithful that are under the direction of clerics, endorse the exercise of the sacred order and are recognized as such by the competent authority are called clerical.

303
303. Third orders, or by another appropriate name, are those associations whose members, living in the world and participating in the spirit of a religious institute, dedicate themselves to the apostolate and seek Christian perfection under the high direction of that institute.

304
304. § 1 . All associations of the faithful, both public and private, whatever their name or title, must have their own statutes, which determine the purpose or social objective of the association, its headquarters, the government and the conditions required to be part of them, and also indicate its way of acting, taking into account the need or convenience of the time and place.
§ 2 . They will choose a title or name that responds to the mentality of the time and place, preferably inspired by the goal they pursue.

305
305. § 1 . All associations of the faithful are under the supervision of the competent ecclesiastical authority, whose responsibility is to ensure that the integrity of faith and customs is preserved in them, and to prevent abuses from being introduced into ecclesiastical discipline; Therefore, she has the duty and right to visit them in accordance with the law and the statutes; and they are also under the regime of that authority, in accordance with the prescriptions of the canons that follow.
§ 2 . All associations, whatever their type, are under the supervision of the Holy See; Diocesan associations are under the supervision of the local Ordinary, as well as other associations to the extent that they work in the diocese.

306
306. To have the rights and privileges of an association and the indulgences and other spiritual graces granted to it, it is necessary and sufficient to have been validly admitted to it and not to have been legitimately expelled according to the prescriptions of the law and the statutes of the association.

307
307. § 1 . The admission of members must take place in accordance with the law and the statutes of each association.
§ 2 . The same person can belong to several associations.
§ 3 . Members of religious institutes may register in associations, with the consent of their Superiors, in accordance with the norm of their own law.

308
308. No one who has been legitimately admitted to an association can be expelled from it, except for just cause, in accordance with the rule of law and the statutes.

309
309. Legitimately established associations have the power, in accordance with the rule of law and the statutes, to establish specific regulations that refer to the association, to hold meetings and to appoint presidents, officers, dependents, and property administrators.

310
310. The private association not constituted as a legal entity cannot, as such, be subject to obligations and rights; but the faithful who are members of it can contract obligations jointly, and acquire and possess property as co-owners and co-possessors; and they can exercise these rights and obligations through an agent or attorney.

311
311. Members of institutes of consecrated life who preside or provide assistance to associations linked in some way to their institute, ensure that these associations provide help to the works of apostolate in the diocese, collaborating above all, under the direction of the local Ordinary, with the associations that seek to exercise the apostolate in the diocese.

312
312. § 1 . It is the competent authority to establish public associations:
1 the Holy See, for universal and international associations;
2 the Episcopal Conference within its territory, for national associations that is, which by the same erection aim to exercise their activity throughout the nation;
3 the diocesan Bishop, within his own territory, but not the diocesan Administrator, for diocesan associations; Exceptions, however, are those associations whose right of erection is reserved for other people.
§ 2 . For the valid erection of an association or a section thereof in a diocese, the consent of the diocesan Bishop is required, given in writing even in the case that such erection is made by apostolic privilege; However, the written consent of the diocesan Bishop to erect a house of a religious institute is also valid to erect, in the same house or in the attached church, an association that is specific to that institute.
312. §1 .
312. § 1, confirm the president of a public association elected by it, or establish the one who has been presented or appoint him in his own right; but it is up to the ecclesiastical authority to appoint the chaplain or ecclesiastical assistant, after hearing, when appropriate, the senior officers of the association.
§ 2 . The rule established in the § 1 also applies to associations established by members of religious institutes by virtue of apostolic privilege, outside their churches or houses; But in associations established by members of religious institutes in their own church or house, the appointment or confirmation of the president and the chaplain is the responsibility of the Superior of the institute, in accordance with the norm of the statutes.
§ 3 . In non-clerical associations, lay people may serve as president and this function should not be entrusted to the chaplain or ecclesiastical assistant, unless the statutes determine otherwise.
§ 4 . In public associations of the faithful, which are directly ordered to the exercise of the apostolate, those who hold leadership positions in political parties should not be presidents.
312. § 1, can appoint a commissioner, who temporarily directs the association on his or her behalf.
§ 2 . The authority that appointed or confirmed him may remove from office the president of a public association, with just cause, after first hearing, however, said president and the senior officers according to the statutes; according to the cc standard. 192-195, the person who appointed him can remove the chaplain.
312. §1, to which the administration must report every year.
§ 2 . He must also give an exact account to the same authority of the use of the offerings and alms received.
312. § 1 ; but the approval of the statutes does not modify the private nature of the association.

313
313. A public association, and also a confederation of public associations, is constituted as a legal entity by virtue of the same decree by which it is established by the competent ecclesiastical authority in accordance with the norm of c. 312, and thus receives the mission to the extent that he needs it, for the purposes that he intends to achieve in the name of the Church.

314
314. The statutes of every public association, as well as their review or change, require the approval of the ecclesiastical authority responsible for their erection, in accordance with the norm of the c

315
315. Public associations can freely adopt initiatives that are in accordance with their character, and are governed in accordance with the norm of their statutes, although always under the high direction of the ecclesiastical authority of which the c

316
316. § 1 . Whoever publicly rejects the Catholic faith or departs from ecclesiastical communion, or is subject to an imposed or declared excommunication, cannot be validly admitted to public associations.
§ 2 . Those who, being legitimately affiliated, fall into the case of § 1, must be expelled from the association, after having been previously reprimanded, in accordance with the statutes themselves and preserving the right to resort to the ecclesiastical authority referred to in c.

317
317. § 1 . Unless otherwise provided in the statutes, it corresponds to the ecclesiastical authority referred to in the c

318
318. § 1 . In special circumstances, when serious reasons require it, the ecclesiastical authority referred to in the c

319
319. § 1 . Unless otherwise provided, a legitimately established public association administers the property it possesses in accordance with the rules of the statutes and under the superior direction of the ecclesiastical authority referred to in the c

320
320. § 1 . Associations erected by the Holy See can only be suppressed by it.
§ 2 . For serious reasons, the Episcopal Conferences may suppress the associations erected by them; the diocesan Bishop, those erected by himself, as well as the associations erected, by virtue of apostolic indult, by members of religious institutes with the consent of the diocesan Bishop.
§ 3 . The competent authority does not suppress a public association without hearing its president and other senior officials.

321
321. The faithful direct and govern private associations, in accordance with the prescriptions of the statutes.

322
322. § 1 . A private association of faithful can acquire legal personality by formal decree of the authority indicated in c. 312.
§ 2 . Only those private associations whose statutes have been approved by the ecclesiastical authority referred to in c.

323
323. § 1 . Although private associations of the faithful have autonomy in accordance with the norm of c. 321, are subject to the supervision of the ecclesiastical authority according to c. 305, and also to the regime of said authority.
§ 2 . It is also up to that ecclesiastical authority, respecting the autonomy of private associations, to monitor and ensure that the dispersion of forces is avoided, and that the exercise of the apostolate is ordered to the common good.

324
324. § 1 . A private association of faithful freely appoints its president and officers, in accordance with the statutes.
§ 2 . If a private association of faithful desires a spiritual advisor, it can freely choose him from among the priests who legitimately exercise ministry in the diocese; However, this requires confirmation from the local Ordinary.

325
325. § 1 . Private associations of faithful freely administer the assets they possess according to the prescriptions of the statutes, safeguarding the right of the competent ecclesiastical authority to supervise so that the assets are used for the purposes of the association.
§ 2 . In accordance with the norm of c. 1301, is under the authority of the local Ordinary with regard to the administration and expenditure of the goods that have been received as a donation or legacy for pious causes.

326
326. § 1 . The private association of faithful is extinguished in accordance with the norm of the statutes; It can also be suppressed by the competent authority, if its activity is seriously damaging to doctrine or ecclesiastical discipline, or causes scandal to the faithful.
§ 2 . The destination of the assets of an association that has been extinguished must be determined in accordance with the rules of the statutes, safeguarding the acquired rights and the will of the donors.

327
327. The lay faithful must hold in great esteem the associations that are established for the spiritual purposes enumerated in c. 298, especially those that try to inform the temporal order with a Christian spirit, and thus foster a more intimate union between faith and life.

328
328. Those who preside over lay associations, even if they have been erected by virtue of apostolic privilege, must ensure that their association collaborates with other associations of the faithful, where appropriate, and that they willingly provide help to the various Christian works, especially those that exist in the same territory.

329
329. The presidents of lay associations must ensure that the members of their association are properly formed for the exercise of the apostolate proper to the laity.

330
330. Just as, by divine determination, Saint Peter and the other Apostles constitute a College, in the same way the Roman Pontiff, successor of Peter, and the Bishops, successors of the Apostles, are united with each other.

331
331. The Bishop of the Roman Church, in whom remains the function that the Lord singularly entrusted to Peter, first among the Apostles, and which was to be transmitted to his successors, is head of the College of Bishops, Vicar of Christ and Pastor of the universal Church on earth; which, therefore, has, by virtue of its function, ordinary power, which is supreme, full, immediate and universal in the Church, and which it can always exercise freely.

332
332. § 1 . The Roman Pontiff obtains full and supreme power in the Church through the legitimate election accepted by him together with the episcopal consecration. Therefore, the person chosen for the supreme pontificate who already has episcopal character, obtains that power from the moment of his acceptance. But if the chosen one lacks episcopal character, he must be ordained Bishop immediately.
§ 2 . If the Roman Pontiff were to renounce his office, for validity it is required that the resignation be free and formally expressed, but not that it be accepted by anyone.

333
333. § 1 . By virtue of his office, the Roman Pontiff not only has power over the entire Church, but also holds the primacy of ordinary power over all the particular Churches and their groups, thereby strengthening and defending at the same time the own, ordinary and immediate power that belongs to the Bishops in the particular Churches entrusted to their care.
§ 2 . In exercising his office as Supreme Pastor of the Church, the Roman Pontiff is always united by communion with the other Bishops and even with the entire Church; He has, however, the right to determine the way, personal or collegial, of exercising that office, according to the needs of the Church.
§ 3 . There is no appeal or appeal against a sentence or decree of the Roman Pontiff.

334
334. In the exercise of their office, the Bishops are at the disposal of the Roman Pontiff, who can provide their cooperation in different ways, among which is the synod of Bishops. The Cardinal Fathers also help him, as well as other people and, according to the needs of the times, various institutions. All these people and institutions fulfill in the name of the Roman Pontiff and with his authority the function entrusted to them, for the good of all the Churches, in accordance with the norms determined by law.

335
335. When the Roman see is vacant or totally impeded, nothing has to be innovated in the regime of the universal Church: however, the special laws given for such cases must be observed.

336
336. The Episcopal College, whose head is the Supreme Pontiff and of which the Bishops are members by virtue of sacramental consecration and hierarchical communion with the head and members of the College, and in which the apostolic body continually perseveres, is also, in union with its head and never without that head, subject of supreme and full power over the entire Church.

337
337. § 1 . The power of the College of Bishops over the entire Church is exercised solemnly in the Ecumenical Council.
§ 2 . This same power is exercised through the joint action of the Bishops dispersed throughout the world, promoted or freely accepted as such by the Roman Pontiff, so that it becomes a truly collegial act.
§ 3 . It is up to the Roman Pontiff, in accordance with the needs of the Church, to determine and promote the ways in which the College of Bishops is to collegially exercise its function for the entire Church.

338
338. § 1 . It is exclusively the responsibility of the Roman Pontiff to convene the Ecumenical Council, to preside over it personally or through others, to transfer it, suspend it or dissolve it, and to approve its decrees.
§ 2 . It is up to the Roman Pontiff to determine the issues to be discussed in the Council, as well as to establish its regulations; To the questions determined by the Roman Pontiff, the Council Fathers can add others, which must be approved by the Pope.

339
339. § 1 . All Bishops who are members of the Episcopal College, and only they, have the right and duty to attend the Ecumenical Council with a deliberative vote.
§ 2 . Others who lack episcopal dignity may also be called to participate in the Council by the supreme authority of the Church, which is responsible for determining the role they should have in the Council.

340
340. If the Apostolic See becomes vacant during the Council, it is interrupted by its own right until the new Supreme Pontiff decides to continue it or dissolve it.

341
341. § 1 . The decrees of the Ecumenical Council only have obligatory force if, having been approved by the Roman Pontiff together with the Council Fathers, they are confirmed by the Pope and promulgated by his mandate.
§ 2 . In order for them to have mandatory force, the decrees given by the Episcopal College through a properly collegial act according to another method promoted or freely accepted by the Roman Pontiff need the same confirmation and promulgation.

342
342. The synod of Bishops is an assembly of Bishops chosen from the different regions of the world, who meet on specified occasions to foster close union between the Roman Pontiff and the Bishops, and to assist the Pope with their advice for the integrity and improvement of faith and customs and the conservation and strengthening of ecclesiastical discipline, and to study questions relating to the action of the Church in the world.

343
343. It is the responsibility of the synod of Bishops to debate the issues that are to be addressed, and to express its opinion, but not to settle these issues or give decrees regarding them, unless in specific cases it has been granted deliberative power by the Roman Pontiff, who is responsible in this case to ratify the decisions of the synod.

344
344. The synod of Bishops is directly subject to the authority of the Roman Pontiff, to whom corresponds:
1 convene the synod, as many times as it deems appropriate, and determine the place in which the meetings should be held;
2 ratify the election of those members who are to be chosen according to the rule of special law, and designate and appoint the other members;
3 determine in advance of the celebration of the synod, according to the specific law, the topics that must be discussed therein;
4 establish the agenda;
5 preside over the synod personally or through others;
6 close the synod, move it, suspend it and dissolve it.

345
345. The synod of Bishops can meet, either in a general assembly, in which issues that directly concern the good of the universal Church are discussed, and this assembly can be either ordinary or extraordinary, or in a special assembly, for problems that directly concern one or several specific regions.

346
346. § 1 . The synod of Bishops, when it meets in an ordinary general assembly, is made up of members who are, for the most part, Bishops, some elected for each assembly by the Episcopal Conferences according to the manner determined by the peculiar law of the synod; others are appointed by the same right; others, appointed directly by the Roman Pontiff; To them are added some members of clerical religious institutes chosen in accordance with the norm of the same peculiar right.
§ 2 . The synod of Bishops gathered in an extraordinary general assembly to deal with issues that require a quick resolution are made up of members who are, for the most part, Bishops designated by the peculiar law of the synod due to the office they perform; others, appointed directly by the Roman Pontiff; To them are added some members of clerical religious institutes, also elected according to the same peculiar right.
§ 3 . The synod of Bishops gathered in a special assembly is made up of members selected mainly from those regions for which it has been convened, according to the norm of the peculiar law by which the synod is governed.

347
347. § 1 . When the Roman Pontiff closes the assembly of the synod of Bishops, the function that had been entrusted to the Bishops and other members in it ceases.
§ 2 . The assembly of the synod is suspended ipso iure, when once convened or during its celebration, a vacancy occurs in the Apostolic See; and the function entrusted to its members is also suspended until the new Pontiff declares the assembly dissolved or decrees its continuation.

348
348. § 1 . The synod of Bishops has a permanent general secretariat, presided over by a General Secretary, appointed by the Roman Pontiff, who is assisted by the council of the secretariat, which consists of Bishops, some of whom are elected by the synod itself according to the norm of its peculiar right, and others are appointed by the Roman Pontiff, whose function ends at the beginning of a new general assembly.
§ 2 . For any type of assemblies of the synod of Bishops, one or more special secretaries designated by the Roman Pontiff are also appointed, who only remain in said office until the conclusion of the synod assembly.

349
349. The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church constitute a peculiar College, which is responsible for providing for the election of the Roman Pontiff, according to the norm of peculiar law; Likewise, the Cardinals assist the Roman Pontiff both collegially, when they are summoned to discuss more important issues together, and personally, through the different offices they perform, helping the Pope above all in his daily government of the universal Church.

350
350. § 1 . The College of Cardinals is divided into three orders: the episcopal, to which belong the Cardinals to whom the Roman Pontiff assigns a suburban Church as a title, as well as the eastern Patriarchs assigned to the College of Cardinals, the presbyteral and the diaconal.
§ 2 . To each Cardinal of the presbyteral and diaconal order the Roman Pontiff assigns a title or diakonia of the City.
§ 3 . The Eastern Patriarchs who are part of the College of Cardinals have their patriarchal seat as their title.
§ 4 . The Cardinal Dean holds the diocese of Ostia as his title, as well as the other Church of which he was already head.
§ 5 . Respecting the priority of order and promotion, through an option made in the Consistory and approved by the Supreme Pontiff, the Cardinals of the presbyteral order can access another title and those of the diaconal order to another diakonia, and, after a full decade in the diaconal order, they can also access the presbyteral order.
§ 6 . The Cardinal of the diaconal order who accesses the priestly order by option, precedes the other Cardinal priests elevated to the Cardinalate after him.

351
351. § 1 . To be promoted to Cardinals, the Roman Pontiff freely chooses among those men who have received at least the priesthood and who stand out notably for their doctrine, customs, piety and prudence in the management of affairs; but those who are not yet Bishops must receive episcopal consecration.
§ 2 . The Cardinals are created by decree of the Roman Pontiff, which is made public in the presence of the College of Cardinals; From the moment of publication, they have the duties and rights determined by law.
§ 3 . However, he who has been promoted to the dignity of cardinal, with the Roman Pontiff announcing his creation but reserving his name in pectore, does not meanwhile have any of the duties or rights of Cardinals; He acquires those duties and rights when the Roman Pontiff makes his name public, but, for the purposes of precedence, the day on which his name was reserved in pectore is taken into account.

352
352. § 1 . The Dean presides over the College of Cardinals and, when he is prevented, the Subdean takes his place; However, neither the Dean nor the Sub-Dean have any governing power over the other Cardinals, but are considered first among their equals.
§ 2 . When the office of Dean becomes vacant, the Cardinals who have a suburban Church as their title, and only they, under the presidency of the Subdean, if present, or of the most senior of them, must elect one within the group to be Dean of the College; They will present their name to the Roman Pontiff, who is responsible for approving the chosen one.
§ 3 . In the same manner established in § 2, under the presidency of the Dean, the Subdean is elected; It is also up to the Roman Pontiff to approve the election of the Subdean.
§ 4 . The Dean and Subdean, if they do not have a domicile in the City, will acquire it there.

353
353. §1 . The Cardinals all collegially help the Supreme Pastor of the Church, especially in the Consistories, in which they meet by order of the Roman Pontiff and under his presidency; There are ordinary and extraordinary Consistories.
§ 2 . At least all the Cardinals present in the City are summoned to the ordinary Consistory to consult them on some serious questions, which nevertheless arise more commonly, or to carry out certain acts of maximum solemnity.
§ 3 . All the Cardinals are summoned to the Extraordinary Consistory, which is held when the special needs of the Church or the seriousness of the matters to be discussed dictate it.
§ 4 . Only the ordinary Consistory in which certain solemnities are celebrated can be public, that is, when, in addition to the Cardinals, Prelates, diplomatic representatives of civil societies and other guests are admitted to the event.

354
354. The Cardinal Fathers who are at the head of dicasteries or other permanent institutes of the Roman Curia and Vatican City are requested that, upon reaching seventy-five years of age, they present the resignation of their office to the Roman Pontiff, who will provide, taking into account all the circumstances.

355
355. § 1 . It is up to the Cardinal Dean to ordain as Bishop the person who has been elected Roman Pontiff, if the chosen one lacks that ordination; If the Dean is prevented, this right falls to the Subdean, and if he is prevented, to the most senior Cardinal in the episcopal order.
§ 2 . The Cardinal Protodeacon announces to the people the name of the new elected Supreme Pontiff; and likewise, on behalf of the Roman Pontiff, he imposes the pallium on the Metropolitans or delivers it to his procurators.

356
356. The Cardinals have the duty to cooperate diligently with the Roman Pontiff; Therefore, Cardinals who perform any office in the Curia and are not diocesan Bishops are obliged to reside in the City; The Cardinals to whom a diocese has been entrusted as diocesan Bishop must go to Rome as many times as they are summoned by the Roman Pontiff.

357
357. § 1 . The Cardinals to whom a suburban Church or a church in the City has been assigned as a title, once they have taken possession of it, must promote the good of those dioceses and churches with their advice and patronage, but they do not enjoy any power of regime over them, and they must in no way interfere with what concerns the administration of their property, discipline or service of the churches.
§ 2 . As regards their own person, the Cardinals who are outside Rome and their own diocese are exempt from the power of regime of the Bishop of the diocese in which they are located.

358
358. The Cardinal to whom the Roman Pontiff entrusts the task of representing him in some solemn celebration or meeting as Legatus a latere, that is, as if he were "himself", and also to the one to whom he entrusts the fulfillment of a certain pastoral task as his special envoy, is responsible only for what the Roman Pontiff himself has entrusted to him.

359
359. When the Apostolic See becomes vacant, the College of Cardinals only has in the Church that power attributed to it in the peculiar law.

360
360. The Roman Curia, through which the Roman Pontiff usually transacts the affairs of the universal Church, and which carries out its function in his name and by authority for the good and service of the Churches, consists of the State or Papal Secretariat, the Council for the public affairs of the Church, the Congregations, Courts, and other Institutions, whose constitution and competence are determined by peculiar law.

361
361. In this Code, under the name of the Apostolic See or Holy See is understood not only the Roman Pontiff, but also, unless by its very nature or by the context otherwise stated, the Secretariat of State, the Council for the public affairs of the Church, and other Institutions of the Roman Curia.

362
362. The Roman Pontiff has the native and independent right to appoint his own Legates and send them both to the particular Churches in the various nations or regions and at the same time to the States and public Authorities; He also has the right to transfer them and have them cease from office, observing the norms of international law regarding the sending and dismissal of Legates to the States.

363
363. § 1 . The Legates of the Roman Pontiff are entrusted with the task of representing him in a stable manner before the particular Churches or also before the States and public Authorities to which they are sent.
§ 2 . Those who are sent on a Pontifical Mission as Delegates or Observers before International Organizations or before Conferences and Meetings also represent the Apostolic See.

364
364. The main function of the Pontifical Legate is to ensure that the bonds of unity that exist between the Apostolic See and the particular Churches are increasingly firm and effective. It is therefore up to the pontifical Legate, within its circumscription:
1 inform the Apostolic See about the conditions in which the particular Churches find themselves and everything that affects the very life of the Church and the good of souls;
2 provide help and advice to the Bishops, without prejudice to the exercise of their legitimate power;
3 maintain frequent relations with the Episcopal Conference, providing it with all types of collaboration;
4 regarding the appointment of Bishops, transmit or propose to the Apostolic See the names of the candidates as well as instruct the information process of those who are to be promoted, according to the norms given by the Apostolic See;
5 strive to promote initiatives in favor of peace, progress and cooperation among peoples;
6 collaborate with the Bishops so that appropriate relations are fostered between the Catholic Church and other Churches or ecclesial communities, and even non-Christian religions;
7 defend together with the Bishops before the state authorities, everything that belongs to the mission of the Church and the Apostolic See;
8 also exercise the powers and fulfill the other mandates entrusted to him by the Apostolic See.

365
365. days, unless it is said that the month and year are to be taken according to the calendar.
§ 2 . If time is continuous, the month and year must always be computed according to the calendar.
365. § 1 . The pontifical Legate, who at the same time exercises his legation before the States according to the norms of international law, is responsible for the peculiar office of:
1 promote and foster relations between the Apostolic See and the State Authorities;
2 deal with those issues that refer to the relations between the Church and the State; and, in particular, work on the negotiation of concordats, and other conventions of this type, and ensure that they are put into practice.
§ 2 . When processing the matters dealt with in the § 1, as circumstances dictate, the Papal Legate will not fail to ask the opinion and advice of the Bishops of the ecclesiastical circumscription, and will inform them of the progress of the proceedings.

366
366. Taking into account the peculiar nature of the function of the Legacy:
1 the seat of the Pontifical Legation is exempt from the power of regime of the local Ordinary, unless it involves the celebration of marriages;
2 the Pontifical Legate, by previously communicating it to the Ordinaries of the places to the extent possible, can celebrate liturgical ceremonies, including pontifical ones, in all the churches of his legation.

367
367. The position of Papal Legate does not cease when the Apostolic See becomes vacant, unless otherwise determined in the pontifical letters; It ceases at the end of the term of office, by revocation communicated to the interested party and by resignation accepted by the Roman Pontiff.

368
368. Particular churches, in which and from which the one and only Catholic Church exists, are mainly the dioceses to which, if nothing else is established, the territorial prelature and the territorial abbey, the apostolic vicariate and the apostolic prefecture as well as the apostolic administration established in a stable manner are assimilated.

369
369. The diocese is a portion of the people of God, whose pastoral care is entrusted to the Bishop with the cooperation of the presbytery, so that, united to its pastor and gathered by him in the Holy Spirit through the Gospel and the Eucharist, it constitutes a particular Church, in which the Church of Christ is truly present and acts, a holy, catholic and apostolic one.

370
370. The territorial prelature or the territorial abbey is a certain portion of the people of God, territorially delimited, whose care is entrusted, by special circumstances, to a Prelate or an Abbot, who governs it as its own shepherd, in the same way as a diocesan Bishop.

372
372. § 1 . As a general rule, the portion of the people of God that constitutes a diocese or other particular Church must be circumscribed within a certain territory, so that it includes all the faithful who live there.
§ 2 . However, when it is useful in the opinion of the supreme authority of the Church, after hearing the interested Episcopal Conferences, separate particular Churches may be erected within the same territory due to the rite of the faithful or for another similar reason.

373
373. It corresponds only to the supreme authority to erect particular Churches, which once they have been legitimately erected, enjoy legal personality by virtue of the right itself.

374
374. § 1 . Every diocese or any other particular Church must be divided into distinct parts or parishes.
§ 2 . To facilitate pastoral care through a common activity, several parishes close to each other can join together in peculiar groups, such as archpriests.

375
375. § 1 . The Bishops, who by divine institution are the successors of the Apostles, by virtue of the Holy Spirit given to them, are constituted as Pastors in the Church so that they too are teachers of doctrine, priests of sacred worship and ministers for the government.
§ 2 . Through episcopal consecration, along with the function of sanctifying, Bishops also receive the functions of teaching and ruling, which, however, by their very nature, can only be exercised in hierarchical communion with the head and members of the College.

376
376. The Bishops who have been entrusted with the care of a diocese are called diocesans; the rest are called holders.

377
377. § 1 . The Supreme Pontiff freely appoints Bishops, or confirms those who have been legitimately elected.
§ 2 . At least every three years, the Bishops of the ecclesiastical province or, where circumstances so advise, those of the Episcopal Conference, must prepare by common agreement and under secrecy a list of priests, also from among the members of institutes of consecrated life, who are most suitable for the episcopate, and must send this list to the Apostolic See, remaining firm the right of each Bishop to make known particularly to the See Apostolic names of priests whom he considers worthy and suitable for the episcopal office.
§ 3 . Unless it is legitimately established otherwise, when a diocesan Bishop or a coadjutor Bishop is to be appointed, to propose a shortlist to the Apostolic See, it is the responsibility of the Papal Legate to investigate separately and communicate to the same Apostolic See, together with his opinion, what the Archbishop and the Suffragans of the province, to which the diocese that is to be provided for or with which it is located, belongs. grouped, as well as the president of the Episcopal Conference; Let the Papal Legate also hear some from the college of consultants and the cathedral chapter and, if he deems it appropriate, secretly and separately ask for the opinion of some of both clergy, and also of lay people who stand out for their wisdom.
§ 4 . If it has not been legitimately provided otherwise, the diocesan Bishop who considers that an auxiliary should be given to his diocese will propose to the Apostolic See a list of at least three of the priests who are most suitable for that office.
§ 5 . Henceforth no right or privilege of election, appointment, presentation and designation of Bishops will be granted to the civil authorities.

378
378. § 1 . For the suitability of candidates to the Episcopate, the interested party must be:
1 distinguished for the firmness of his faith, good morals, piety, zeal for souls, wisdom, prudence and human virtues, and endowed with the other qualities that make him suitable to exercise the office in question;
2 of good reputation;
3 at least thirty-five years old;
4 ordained priest for at least five years;
5 doctor or at least a graduate in sacred Scripture, theology or canon law, from an institute of higher studies approved by the Apostolic See, or at least truly expert in these disciplines.
§ 2 . The final judgment on the suitability of the candidate corresponds to the Apostolic See.

379
379. Unless he is legitimately prevented, he who has been promoted to the Episcopate must receive episcopal consecration within a period of three months from the day on which the apostolic letters reached him; and, in any case, before taking up his position.

380
380. Before taking canonical possession of his office, he who has been promoted must make the profession of faith and take the oath of fidelity to the Apostolic See, according to the formula approved by the Apostolic See itself.

381
381. § 2, excluding the general and episcopal Vicar, unless they have a special mandate.
381. § 1 . In the diocese in which he has been entrusted, the diocesan Bishop has all the ordinary, proper and immediate power required for the exercise of his pastoral function, with the exception of those causes that by law or by decree of the Supreme Pontiff are reserved to the supreme authority or to another ecclesiastical authority.
§ 2 . Unless otherwise stated by the nature of the matter or by legal prescription, those who preside over other communities of faithful mentioned in c. 368.
381. § 2, they acquire the property in favor of the particular Church; The others acquire it for the institute or for the Holy See, depending on whether the institute is capable of possessing it or not;
2 if he did not lose control of the goods through profession, he recovers the use, usufruct and administration of the goods he had, and fully acquires for himself those others that he obtains subsequently;
3 in both cases, you must dispose according to the will of the donors of those assets that you do not acquire in consideration of your person.

382
382. § 1 . He who has been promoted to the Episcopate should not interfere in the exercise of the office entrusted to him, before taking canonical possession of the diocese; He can, however, exercise the offices that he already had in the same diocese when he was promoted, without prejudice to the provisions of the c

383
383. § 1 . In exercising his pastoral function, the diocesan Bishop must be solicitous with all the faithful entrusted to him, whatever their age, condition or nationality, whether they live in the territory or if they are there temporarily, expressing his apostolic zeal also to those who, due to their circumstances, cannot sufficiently obtain the fruits of ordinary pastoral care, as well as to those who have distanced themselves from the practice of religion.
§ 2 . If there are faithful of another rite in your diocese, provide for their spiritual needs through priests or parishes of this rite, or through an Episcopal Vicar.
§ 3 . He must be humane and charitable towards brothers who are not in full communion with the Catholic Church, also promoting ecumenism as the Church understands it.
§ 4 . Consider that the unbaptized are entrusted to him in the Lord, so that the charity of Christ may also shine before them, of whom the Bishop must be a witness before men.

384
384. The diocesan Bishop attends with particular concern to the priests, whom he must listen to as his collaborators and advisors, defend their rights and ensure that they duly fulfill the obligations of their state, and that they have at their disposal those means and institutions that they need for the increase of their spiritual and intellectual life; and also ensure that their honest support and social assistance is provided, in accordance with the rule of law.

385
385. The diocesan Bishop should encourage with all his might vocations to the various ministries and consecrated life, devoting special attention to priestly and missionary vocations.

386
386. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop must teach and explain to the faithful the truths of faith that must be believed and lived, preaching frequently personally; Also take care that the prescriptions of the canons on the ministry of the word, mainly on the homily and the teaching of the catechism, are diligently fulfilled, so that the entirety of Christian doctrine is taught to all.
§ 2 . Defend with strength, in the most appropriate way, the integrity and unity of the faith, nevertheless recognizing the just freedom to investigate the truth more deeply.

387
387. The diocesan Bishop, aware that he is obliged to set an example of holiness with his charity, humility and simplicity of life, must try with all his strength to promote the holiness of the faithful, according to each one's own vocation; and, as the principal dispenser of the mysteries of God, he must incessantly ensure that the faithful entrusted to him grow in grace through the celebration of the sacraments, and know and live the paschal mystery.

388
388. § 1 . Once he has taken possession of the diocese, the diocesan Bishop must apply for the people entrusted to him the Mass every Sunday and other holy days of obligation in his region.
§ 2 . On the days indicated in the § 1, the Bishop must personally celebrate and apply the Mass for the people; and if he cannot celebrate it due to legitimate impediment, he will apply it on those same days through another person, or on other days personally.
§ 3 . The Bishop to whom, in addition to his own, other dioceses are entrusted, even by way of administration, fulfills this duty by applying a single Mass for the entire people entrusted to him.
§ 4 . The Bishop who has stopped fulfilling the obligation referred to in §§ 1 -3 must, as soon as possible, apply for the people as many Masses as he has stopped offering.

389
389. He frequently presides over the celebration of the Holy Eucharist in the cathedral or in another Church of his diocese, especially on holy days of obligation and other solemnities.

390
390. The diocesan Bishop can celebrate pontificals throughout his diocese; but not outside his own diocese without the express or at least reasonably presumed consent of the local Ordinary.

391
391. § 1 . It is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop to govern the particular Church entrusted to him with legislative, executive and judicial power, in accordance with the law.
§ 2 . The Bishop personally exercises legislative power; The executive is exercised by himself or through the general or episcopal Vicars, in accordance with the rule of law; the judicial both personally and through the judicial Vicar and the judges, in accordance with the rule of law.

392
392. § 1 . Since he has the obligation to defend the unity of the universal Church, the Bishop must promote the discipline that is common to the entire Church, and therefore demand compliance with all ecclesiastical laws.
§ 2 . He must ensure that abuses are not introduced into ecclesiastical discipline, especially regarding the ministry of the word, the celebration of sacraments and sacramentals, the worship of God and the Saints and the administration of goods.

393
393. The diocesan Bishop represents the diocese in all its legal affairs.

394
394. § 1 . The Bishop should promote the different forms of apostolate in the diocese, and ensure that, throughout the diocese or in its particular districts, all apostolate activities are coordinated under his direction, respecting the proper character of each one.
§ 2 . Urge the faithful to fulfill their duty to carry out apostolate according to the condition and capacity of each one, and exhort them to participate in the various apostolate initiatives and provide them with help, according to the needs of place and time.

395
395. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop, even if he has a coadjutor or auxiliary, is bound by the law of personal residence in the diocese.
§ 2 . Apart from absences due to the ad limina visit, his duty to attend Councils, the Synod of Bishops and the meetings of the Episcopal Conference, or to fulfill another office that has been legitimately entrusted to him, he may be absent from his diocese with reasonable cause for no more than one month continuously or with interruptions, provided that he ensures that the diocese does not suffer any damage due to his absence.
§ 3 . He must not be absent from his diocese on Christmas, Holy Week and the Resurrection of the Lord, Pentecost and Corpus Christi, unless there is a serious and urgent cause.
§ 4 . If a Bishop is illegitimately absent from the diocese for more than six months, the Metropolitan will report this fact to the Apostolic See; If the Metropolitan is absent, the oldest of the suffragans will do the same.

396
396. § 1 . The Bishop has the obligation to visit the diocese every year totally or partially so that at least every five years he visits the entire diocese, personally or, if he is legitimately prevented, through the coadjutor Bishop, or the auxiliary, or the general or episcopal Vicar, or another priest.
§ 2 . The Bishop may choose the clerics he wishes to accompany him and help him during the visit, and any privilege or custom against this will be disapproved.

397
397. § 1 . Persons, Catholic institutions, things and sacred places that are within the scope of the diocese are subject to the ordinary episcopal visitation.
§ 2 . Only in cases determined by law can the Bishop make this visit to the members of the religious institutes of pontifical right and their homes.

398
398. Let the Bishop try to carry out the canonical visitation with due diligence: and take care not to be annoying or burdensome to anyone with unnecessary expenses.

399
399. § 1 . Every five years the diocesan Bishop must present to the Roman Pontiff a report on the situation of his diocese, according to the model determined by the Apostolic See and in the time established by it.
§ 2 . If the year established for presenting the report coincides in whole or in part with the first two years since he assumed the government of the diocese, the Bishop may for that time dispense with preparing and presenting the report.

400
400. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop, in the year in which he must present the report to the Supreme Pontiff, goes to Rome, unless the Apostolic See has been established otherwise, to venerate the tombs of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and present himself to the Roman Pontiff.
§ 2 . The Bishop must personally fulfill this obligation, unless he is legitimately prevented: in this case he will do so through the coadjutor, if he has one, or the auxiliary, or a suitable priest from his presbytery, who resides in his diocese.
§ 3 . The Apostolic Vicar can fulfill this obligation through a procurator, even one who lives in Rome; The Apostolic Prefect does not have this obligation.

401
401. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop who has reached the age of seventy-five is requested to present the resignation of his office to the Supreme Pontiff, who will provide for it taking into account all the circumstances.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop is strongly requested to present his resignation from his office if due to illness or other serious cause his ability to perform it is diminished.
401. and 402 § 2 .

402
402. § 1 . The Bishop whose resignation from his office has been accepted retains the title of resigned Bishop of his diocese, and, if he wishes, may continue to reside there, unless in cases determined by special circumstances the Apostolic See provides otherwise.
§ 2 . The Episcopal Conference must ensure that the necessary provisions are made for the convenient and dignified support of the resigning Bishop, taking into account that the main obligation falls on the same diocese that he served.
402. § 2, unless your own institute wishes to take charge of that support; Otherwise, the Apostolic See will provide otherwise.

403
403. § 1 . When the pastoral needs of a diocese make it advisable, one or more auxiliary Bishops will be constituted, at the request of the diocesan Bishop; The auxiliary Bishop does not have the right of succession.
§ 2 . When more serious circumstances arise, also of a personal nature, the diocesan Bishop may be given an auxiliary Bishop endowed with special faculties.
§ 3 . If it seems more appropriate to the Holy See, it may appoint on its own initiative a coadjutor Bishop, also endowed with special faculties; The Coadjutor Bishop has the right of succession.
403. § 2, assist the diocesan Bishop in the entire government of the diocese, and take his place when he is absent or impeded.
403. § 2, must be appointed Vicar General by the diocesan Bishop; Furthermore, the diocesan Bishop must entrust to him, before others, everything that by law requires a special mandate.
§ 2 . Unless otherwise established in the apostolic letters and without prejudice to what is prescribed by § 1, the diocesan Bishop must appoint the auxiliary, or auxiliaries, Vicars General or, at least, Episcopal Vicars, who depend exclusively on his authority or that of the Coadjutor Bishop or Auxiliary Bishop referred to in c.
403. § 2 .
403. § 2 , they must consult each other in matters of greatest importance.
§ 2 . It is advisable that the diocesan Bishop, when resolving the most important matters, especially of a pastoral nature, consult the auxiliary Bishops before others.
§ 3 . The Coadjutor Bishop and the Auxiliary Bishop, because they are called to participate in the request of the diocesan Bishop, must exercise their functions in union of action and intentions with him.

404
404. § 1 . The Coadjutor Bishop takes possession of his office when he personally, or through a procurator, presents the apostolic letters of his appointment to the diocesan Bishop and the college of consultants, in the presence of the chancellor of the curia, who draws up a record.
§ 2 . The auxiliary bishop takes possession of his office when he presents the apostolic letters of his appointment to the diocesan bishop, in the presence of the chancellor of the curia, who draws up minutes.
§ 3 . In the event that the diocesan Bishop is totally prevented, it is sufficient for the coadjutor or auxiliary Bishop to present the apostolic letters of his appointment to the college of consultants in the presence of the chancellor of the curia.

405
405. § 1 . The Coadjutor Bishop, and also the Auxiliary Bishop, have the rights and obligations that are determined in the canons that follow, and those established in the letters of their appointment.
§ 2 . The Coadjutor Bishop and the Auxiliary Bishop, which is discussed in c.

406
406. § 1 . The Coadjutor Bishop, as well as the Auxiliary Bishop mentioned in the c
406. and 409, due to removal ordered by the Bishop or when the episcopal see is vacant.
§ 2 . Once the diocesan Bishop is suspended from office, the power of the Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar is suspended, unless they are Bishops.

407
407. § 1 . To promote as much as possible the present and future good of the diocese, the diocesan Bishop, the coadjutor and the auxiliary Bishop referred to in the c

408
408. § 1 . If they are not justly prevented, the Coadjutor Bishop and the Auxiliary Bishop have the duty to celebrate pontificals and other functions that constitute an obligation of the diocesan Bishop, as many times as the latter requests.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop should not habitually entrust to another those episcopal rights and functions that the coadjutor or auxiliary Bishop can exercise.

409
409. § 2 .
§ 2 . Unless he is legitimately prevented, he who has been promoted to the office of diocesan Bishop must take canonical possession of his diocese within a period of four months from the moment in which he receives the apostolic letters, if he had not yet received episcopal consecration, and within a period of two months, if he was already consecrated.
§ 3 . The Bishop takes canonical possession of his diocese as soon as in the same diocese, personally or through a procurator, he shows the apostolic letters to the college of consultants, in the presence of the chancellor of the curia, who draws up a record, or, in newly erected dioceses, when he makes the clergy and people present in the cathedral church aware of those letters, with the oldest priest among those attending drawing up a record.
§4 . It is highly advisable that the canonical inauguration takes place in the cathedral church, with a liturgical act attended by the clergy and the people.
409. § 1 . When the episcopal see becomes vacant, the coadjutor Bishop immediately becomes Bishop of the diocese for which he was appointed, provided he has already legitimately taken possession.
§ 2 . If the competent authority has not established otherwise, when the episcopal see becomes vacant and until the new Bishop takes possession of the diocese, the auxiliary Bishop retains all and only those powers and faculties that as Vicar General or Episcopal Vicar he had when the see was covered; and if he has not been chosen for the function of diocesan Administrator, he exercises that power of his, which the right confers on him, under the authority of the diocesan Administrator who is in charge of the diocese.
409. § 2 ;
2 receives full remuneration for his job.

410
410. The coadjutor Bishop and the auxiliary Bishop, as well as the diocesan Bishop, have the duty to reside in the diocese, from which they should not be absent except for a short time, except when they have to fulfill an office outside the diocese or on vacation, which should not last more than one month.

411
411. As regards the resignation of the office, the prescriptions of the ccs apply to the coadjutor and auxiliary Bishop.

412
412. The episcopal see is considered impeded when, due to captivity, relegation, banishment or incapacity, the diocesan Bishop is totally unable to exercise his pastoral function in the diocese, so that not even by letter can he communicate with his diocesans.

413
413. § 1 . Unless the Holy See has provided otherwise, when a see is prevented, the government of the diocese is the responsibility of the Coadjutor Bishop if he is present; and if it does not exist or is prevented, to an auxiliary Bishop or Vicar general or episcopal, or to another priest in accordance with the order established in a list that must be drawn up by the diocesan Bishop as soon as possible, once he has taken possession of the diocese; This list, which must be communicated to the Metropolitan, will be renewed at least every three years, and will be kept secret by the chancellor.
§ 2 . If there is no coadjutor Bishop or he is prevented, and the list mentioned in the § 1 is not provided, it is up to the college of consultants to choose a priest to govern the diocese.
§ 3 . Whoever takes charge of the regime of the diocese in accordance with §§ 1 or 2, must inform the Holy See as soon as possible that the diocese is impeded and that he has assumed its government.

414
414. Anyone who, in accordance with the norm of c. 413, has been called to temporarily exercise the pastoral care of the diocese while it is impeded, has in his pastoral function the obligations and power that by right belong to a diocesan Administrator.

415
415. If, due to an ecclesiastical penalty, the diocesan Bishop is prevented from exercising his function, the Metropolitan or, failing that or in the case of himself, the most senior of the suffragans according to the order of promotion, will immediately appeal to the Holy See, so that it provides.

416
416. An episcopal see becomes vacant due to the death of the Bishop, resignation accepted by the Roman Pontiff, transfer and deprivation notified to the Bishop.

417
417. All acts carried out by the Vicar General or by the Episcopal Vicar are valid, until they have received certain news of the death of the diocesan Bishop, and the acts carried out by the Diocesan Bishop or by the Vicar General or Episcopal are equally valid, until the moment in which they receive certain news of the aforementioned pontifical acts.

418
418. § 1 . From the moment he receives certain news of his transfer, the Bishop must go to the ad quam diocese within two months, and take canonical possession of it, and the diocese to which it becomes vacant at the time he takes possession of the new one.
§ 2 . From the day he receives certain news of his transfer until he takes canonical possession of the new diocese, in the diocese to which the Bishop transferred:
1 has the power and duties of a diocesan Administrator, and all power of the Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar ceases except as indicated in c.

419
419. When the see becomes vacant and until the constitution of the diocesan Administrator, the government of the diocese passes to the auxiliary Bishop or, if there are several, to the most senior of them in the order of their promotion, and, where there is no auxiliary Bishop, to the college of consultants, unless the Holy See has established otherwise. Whoever thus takes charge of the government of the diocese must convene without delay the college that is competent to appoint the diocesan Administrator.

420
420. When the see becomes vacant in a vicariate or apostolic prefecture, the Provicar or Proprefect, appointed exclusively for this purpose by the Vicar or Prefect, takes charge of the government immediately after the canonical takeover, unless the Holy See has determined otherwise.

421
421. § 1 . The diocesan Administrator, that is, the one who must temporarily govern the diocese, must be elected by the college of consultants within eight days from the moment in which it receives news of the vacancy of the see, without prejudice to what is prescribed by the c
421. § 2 and 425 § 3 .
§ 2 . When circumstances require it, the Metropolitan may receive from the Holy See special orders and powers that will be determined by particular law.
§ 3 . No other power of regime belongs to the Metropolitan over the suffragan dioceses; but he can perform sacred functions in all churches, just like the Bishop in his own diocese, prior warning to the diocesan Bishop, when it comes to the cathedral church.

422
422. The auxiliary Bishop and, failing that, the college of consultants, inform the Apostolic See as soon as possible of the death of the Bishop; and whoever has been elected Diocesan Administrator must do the same with respect to his appointment.

423
423. §1 . Any contrary custom being disapproved, a single diocesan Administrator must be appointed; Otherwise, the election is void.
§2 . The diocesan Administrator must not be at the same time a treasurer; Therefore, if the treasurer is appointed Administrator, the economic affairs council will provisionally elect another treasurer.

424
424. The diocesan Administrator must be chosen in accordance with the norm of ccs. 165-178.

425
425. § 1 . Only a priest who has reached the age of thirty-five and has not been elected, appointed or presented for the same vacant see can be validly appointed to the position of Diocesan Administrator.
§ 2 . A priest who stands out for his doctrine and prudence must be chosen as Diocesan Administrator.
§ 3 . If the conditions established in the § 1 have not been respected, the Metropolitan, or the oldest suffragan according to the order of promotion in the case of the Metropolitan Church, will appoint the Administrator for that time, after verifying the facts; The acts carried out by whoever has been elected against what is prescribed by § 1 are null and void by virtue of the law itself.

426
426. While the see is vacant, whoever governs the diocese, before being appointed Diocesan Administrator, has the power that the law attributes to the Vicar General.

427
427. § 1 . The diocesan Administrator has the duties and enjoys the power of the diocesan Bishop, with the exclusion of everything that by its very nature or by the law itself is excepted.
§ 2 . The diocesan Administrator acquires his power by the very fact of having accepted his election, and no confirmation is required from anyone, remaining firm the obligation prescribed by c. 833, 4.

428
428. § 1 . With the headquarters vacant, nothing should be innovated.
§ 2 . Those who temporarily take charge of the regime of the diocese are prohibited from carrying out any act that may cause harm to the diocese or episcopal rights; Specifically, they and any others, personally or through others, are prohibited from stealing, destroying or altering any document of the diocesan curia.

429
429. The diocesan Administrator is obliged to reside in the diocese and to apply the Mass for the people in accordance with the norm of c. 388.

430
430. § 1 . The diocesan Administrator ceases to hold office when the new Bishop takes possession of the diocese.
§ 2 . The removal of the diocesan Administrator is reserved to the Holy See; The resignation, if applicable, must be submitted authentically to the college competent for its election, but does not need its acceptance; In case of removal or resignation of the diocesan Administrator, or if he dies, another diocesan Administrator will be elected, in accordance with the norm of c. 421.

431
431. § 1 . To promote common pastoral action in several neighboring dioceses, according to the circumstances of the people and places, and so that reciprocal relations between the diocesan Bishops are more adequately fostered, the particular Churches will be grouped into ecclesiastical provinces delimited territorially.
§ 2 . As a general rule, there will be no exempt dioceses from now on; Therefore, all dioceses and other particular Churches that are within the territory of an ecclesiastical province must be attached to that province.
§ 3 . It corresponds exclusively to the supreme authority of the Church, after hearing the interested Bishops, to constitute, suppress or change the provinces.

432
432. § 1 . In the ecclesiastical province, the Provincial Council and the Metropolitan Council have authority, in accordance with the rule of law.
§ 2 . The province has, in its own right, legal personality.

433
433. § 1 . If it seems useful, especially in nations where there are more
Particular churches, the closest ecclesiastical provinces can be constituted by the Holy See into ecclesiastical regions, at the proposal of the Episcopal Conference.
§ 2 . The ecclesiastical region can be established as a legal entity.

434
434. It is the responsibility of the assembly of Bishops of an ecclesiastical region to promote cooperation and common pastoral action in the region; However, the powers that in the canons of this Code are attributed to the Episcopal Conference do not correspond to the aforementioned assembly, unless the Holy See grants it some in a special way.

435
435. The Metropolitan presides over the ecclesiastical province, who is in turn Archbishop of the diocese entrusted to him; This office is attached to an episcopal see determined or approved by the Roman Pontiff.

436
436. § 1 . In the suffragan dioceses, the Metropolitan is responsible for:
1 to ensure that faith and ecclesiastical discipline are diligently preserved, and to inform the Roman Pontiff about abuses if any;
2 make the canonical visitation if the suffragan had neglected it, with a cause previously approved by the Apostolic See;
3 appoint the diocesan Administrator, in accordance with cc.

437
437. § 1 . Within a period of three months from the episcopal consecration, or from the canonical provision, if he had already been consecrated, the Metropolitan, personally or through a procurator, is obliged to ask the Roman Pontiff for the pallium, which is a sign of the power with which, in communion with the Roman Church, he is invested in his own province.
§ 2 . The Metropolitan may use the pallium in accordance with the liturgical laws, in all the churches of the ecclesiastical province over which he presides, but not outside it, not even with the consent of the diocesan Bishop.
§3 . The Metropolitan needs a new canopy, if it is transferred to a different metropolitan headquarters.

438
438. Apart from the honorific prerogative, the title of Patriarch or Primate does not carry with it any power of regime in the Latin Church, unless in some case something else is established by apostolic privilege or by approved custom.

439
439. § 1 . The plenary council, for all the particular Churches of the same Episcopal Conference, must be held whenever it appears necessary or useful to that Episcopal Conference, with the approval of the Apostolic See.
§ 2 . The norm established in the § 1 also applies to the provincial council held in an ecclesiastical province whose limits coincide with those of the territory of a nation.
439. § 2 .
§ 2 . The provincial council should not be convened when the metropolitan seat is vacant.

440
440. § 1 . The provincial council for the different particular Churches of the same ecclesiastical province must be held as many times as it seems appropriate to the majority of the diocesan Bishops of the province, without prejudice to what is prescribed by the c

441
441. It corresponds to the Episcopal Conference:
1 convene the plenary council;
2 designate within the territory of the Episcopal Conference the place where the council is to be held;
3 elect from among the diocesan Bishops the president of the plenary council, which must be approved by the Apostolic See;
4 determine the regulations and the issues to be discussed, set the start date and duration of the plenary council, move it, extend it and conclude it.

442
442. § 1 . It is up to the Metropolitan, with the consent of the majority of the suffragan Bishops:
1 convene the provincial council;
2 designate the place of its celebration within the territory of the province;
3 determine the regulations and the issues to be discussed, set the start date and duration of the provincial council, move it, extend it and conclude it.
§ 2 . The presidency of the provincial council falls to the Metropolitan and, if he is legitimately prevented, to the suffragan Bishop elected by the others.

443
443. § 1 They must be summoned to particular councils and have a deliberative vote in them:
1 the diocesan Bishops;
2 the coadjutor and auxiliary Bishops;
3 other titular Bishops who perform a peculiar function in the territory, commissioned by the Apostolic See or the Episcopal Conference.
§ 2 . Other titular Bishops, even retired ones, who reside within the territory may be called to the particular councils; which have a deliberative vote.
§ 3 . The following must be summoned to particular councils with only an advisory vote:
1 the Vicars General and the Episcopal Vicars of all the particular Churches of the territory;
2 the major Superiors of religious institutes and societies of apostolic life, in numbers that will be set, for both men and women, by the Episcopal Conference or by the Bishops of the province, elected respectively by all the major Superiors of the institutes and societies based in the territory;
3 the rectors of ecclesiastical and Catholic universities and the deans of the faculties of theology and canon law, who have their headquarters in the territory;
4 some rectors of major seminaries, whose number will be determined as established in n. 2, chosen by the rectors of the seminaries in the territory.
§ 4 . Priests and some other faithful may also be called to particular councils, with an advisory vote, in such a way, however, that their number does not exceed half of those indicated in §§ 1 -3.
§ 5 . The cathedral chapters, as well as the presbyteral council and the pastoral council of each particular Church, must also be invited to the provincial councils, so that each of these institutions sends two of its members elected collegially as procurators; and these have only an advisory vote.
§ 6 . Other people may also be called to particular councils as guests, if it seems appropriate to the Episcopal Conference for the plenary council, or to the Metropolitan together with the suffragan Bishops for the provincial council.

444
444. § 1 . All those who have been summoned must attend the particular councils, unless there is a just impediment, of which they must inform the president of the council.
§ 2 . Those who have been summoned to a particular council and enjoy a deliberative vote therein may send a procurator if they are justly prevented from attending; This attorney only has an advisory vote.

445
445. The particular council ensures that the pastoral needs of the People of God are provided for in its territory, and has power of regime, especially legislative, so that, always safeguarding the universal law of the Church, it can establish whatever seems appropriate for the increase of faith, the organization of common pastoral activity, the order of good customs and the observance, establishment or protection of common ecclesiastical discipline.

446
446. Once the particular council is concluded, its president must ensure that the complete minutes of the council are sent to the Apostolic See; The decrees given by the council will not be promulgated until after they have been reviewed by the Apostolic See; It is up to the same council to determine the manner of promulgation of the decrees and the moment at which, once promulgated, they will begin to bind.

447
447. The Episcopal Conference, a permanent institution, is the assembly of the Bishops of a given nation or territory, who together exercise some pastoral functions with respect to the faithful of their territory, to promote in accordance with the rule of law the greatest good that the Church provides to men, above all through forms and modes of apostolate suitably adapted to the peculiar circumstances of time and place.

448
448. § 1 . As a general rule, the Episcopal Conference includes the prelates of all the particular Churches of the same nation, in accordance with the norm of c. 450.
§ 2 . But, if in the opinion of the Apostolic See, having heard the interested diocesan Bishops, the circumstances of people or things so advise, an Episcopal Conference can be erected for a territory of smaller or larger extension, so that it only includes the Bishops of some particular Churches existing in a certain territory, or the prelates of the particular Churches of different nations; It is up to the Apostolic See itself to give specific norms for each of these Conferences.

449
449. § 1 . It is exclusively the responsibility of the supreme authority of the Church, after hearing the interested Bishops, to erect, suppress or change the Episcopal Conferences.
§ 2 . The legitimately established Episcopal Conference has legal personality by virtue of the law itself.

450
450. § 1 . By law itself, all the diocesan Bishops of the territory and those who are equivalent to them in law belong to the Episcopal Conference, as well as the coadjutor Bishops, the auxiliary Bishops and the other titular Bishops who, by order of the Holy See or the Episcopal Conference, fulfill a peculiar function in the same territory; Ordinaries of another rite may also be invited, but only with a consultative vote, unless the statutes of the Episcopal Conference determine otherwise.
§ 2 . The other titular Bishops and the Legate of the Roman Pontiff are not de jure members of the Episcopal Conference.

451
451. Each Episcopal Conference must draw up its own statutes, which must be reviewed by the Apostolic See, in which, among other things, norms are established on the plenary assemblies of the Conference, the permanent commission of Bishops and the general secretariat of the Conference, and other offices and commissions are also established that, in the opinion of the Conference, can contribute more effectively to achieving its goal.

452
452. § 1 . Each Episcopal Conference elects its own president in accordance with the rules of the statutes, determines who is to fulfill the function of vice president when the president is legitimately prevented, and appoints the general secretary.
§ 2 . The president of the Conference or, when he is legitimately prevented, the vice president, chairs not only the general assemblies of the Conference, but also the permanent commission.

453
453. The plenary meetings of the Episcopal Conference must be held at least once a year, and also whenever special circumstances require it, according to the prescriptions of the statutes.

454
454. § 1 . In the plenary meetings of the Episcopal Conference, the diocesan Bishops and those who are equivalent to them in law, as well as the coadjutor Bishops, have a deliberative vote of their own right.
§ 2 . The auxiliary Bishops and the other titular Bishops belonging to the Episcopal Conference have a deliberative or consultative vote, as determined by the statutes of the Conference; It must be firm, however, that only those mentioned in the § 1 enjoy the deliberative vote when it comes to drafting the statutes or modifying them.

455
455. § 1 . The Episcopal Conference can issue general decrees only in cases where common law so prescribes or when so established by a special mandate of the Apostolic See, granted motu proprio or at the request of the Conference itself.
§ 2 . For the validity of the decrees discussed in the § 1, it is necessary that they be given in a plenary meeting with at least two-thirds of the votes of the Prelates who belong to the Conference with a deliberative vote, and they do not obtain binding force until, having been reviewed by the Apostolic See, they are legitimately promulgated.
§ 3 . The Episcopal Conference itself determines the mode of promulgation and the day from which the decrees come into force.
§ 4 . In cases in which neither universal law nor a peculiar mandate of the Holy See has granted the Episcopal Conference the power referred to in § 1, the competence of each diocesan Bishop remains complete and neither the Conference nor its president can act on behalf of all the Bishops unless each and every one has given their own consent.

456
456. At the conclusion of the plenary meeting of the Episcopal Conference, the president will send to the Apostolic See a list of the minutes of the Conference as well as its decrees, both so that these minutes come to the attention of the Apostolic See and so that it can review the decrees, if any.

457
457. It is the responsibility of the permanent commission of Bishops to ensure that the issues to be discussed in the plenary meeting are prepared, and that the decisions taken therein are duly executed; It is also responsible for carrying out other matters entrusted to it in accordance with the rules of the statutes.

458
458. The general secretariat is responsible for:
1 make a list of the minutes and decrees of the plenary meeting of the Conference and the acts of the permanent commission of Bishops, and transmit them to all members of the Conference; and also write other minutes assigned to him by the president of the Conference or the permanent commission;
2 communicate to the neighboring Episcopal Conferences the acts and documents whose transmission to them has been commissioned by the Conference in a plenary meeting or by the permanent commission of Bishops.

459
459. § 1 . Relations between Episcopal Conferences must be fostered, especially among those closest to each other, to promote and defend the greatest good.
§ 2 . However, the Apostolic See must be heard beforehand whenever the Episcopal Conferences do or declare something of a clearly international nature.

460
460. The diocesan synod is an assembly of priests and other faithful chosen from a particular Church, who provide their help to the Bishop of the diocese for the good of the entire diocesan community, in accordance with the canons that follow.

461
461. § 1 . In each particular Church, the diocesan synod must be held when circumstances warrant it in the judgment of the Bishop of the diocese, after hearing the presbyteral council.
§ 2 . If a Bishop is entrusted with the care of several dioceses, or is diocesan Bishop of one and Administrator of another, he can celebrate a synod for all the dioceses that have been entrusted to him.

462
462. § 1 . Only the diocesan Bishop can convene the synod, and not the one who provisionally presides over the diocese.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop presides over the synod, although he can delegate this function, for each of the sessions, to the Vicar General or to an Episcopal Vicar.

463
463. § 1 . They must be summoned to the diocesan synod as synodal members and have the duty to participate in it:
1 the Coadjutor Bishop and the auxiliary Bishops;
2 the Vicars General and the Episcopal Vicars, as well as the Judicial Vicar;
3 the canons of the cathedral church;
4 members of the presbyteral council;
5 lay faithful, also those who are members of institutes of consecrated life, at the election of the pastoral council, in the form and number determined by the diocesan Bishop or, in the absence of this council, in the manner determined by the Bishop;
6 the rector of the diocesan major seminary;
7 the archpriests;
8 at least one priest from each archpriest, elected by all those who have a priest of souls in him; Likewise, another priest must be chosen to eventually replace the previous one in case of impediment;
9 some Superiors of religious institutes and societies of apostolic life that have a home in the diocese, who will be elected in the number and in the manner determined by the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop can also call other people to the synod as members, both clerics, members of institutes of consecrated life, and lay faithful.
§ 3 . If he deems it appropriate, the diocesan Bishop may invite to the synod, as observers, some ministers or members of Churches or ecclesial communities that are not in full communion with the Catholic Church.

464
464. If a member of the synod is legitimately prevented, he cannot send a procurator to assist on his behalf; but he must inform the diocesan Bishop about this impediment.

465
465. All proposed questions will be submitted to the free discussion of the members in the sessions of the synod.

466
466. The diocesan Bishop is the only legislator in the diocesan synod, and the other members of it have only an advisory vote; He alone signs the declarations and decrees of the synod, which can be published only by virtue of his authority.

467
467. The diocesan Bishop must transfer the text of the synodal declarations and decrees to the Metropolitan and the Episcopal Conference.

468
468. § 1 . It is up to the diocesan Bishop, according to his prudent judgment, to suspend and even dissolve the diocesan synod.
§ 2 . If the episcopal see is vacant or impeded, the diocesan synod is interrupted by its own right, until the new diocesan Bishop decrees its continuation or declares it concluded.

469
469. The diocesan curia consists of those organizations and people who collaborate with the Bishop in the government of the entire diocese, mainly in the direction of pastoral activity, in the administration of the diocese, as well as in the exercise of judicial power.

470
470. It is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop to appoint those who are to carry out offices in the diocesan curia.

471
471. All those who are admitted to hold offices in the diocesan curia must:
1 promise that they will faithfully carry out their task, according to the manner determined by law or by the Bishop;
2 keep secret, within the limits and according to the manner established by law or by the Bishop.

472
472. Regarding the causes and people related to the exercise of judicial power in the curia, the prescriptions of Book VII of the processes must be observed; As far as the administration of the diocese is concerned, the prescriptions of the following canons will be observed.

473
473. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop must ensure that all matters relating to the administration of the entire diocese are duly coordinated, and that they are ordered in the most effective way for the good of the portion of the people of God entrusted to him.
§ 2 . It is up to the diocesan Bishop himself to coordinate the pastoral activity of the Vicars, whether general or episcopal; Where appropriate, a Moderator of the Curia may be appointed, who must be a priest, whose responsibility it is, under the authority of the Bishop, to coordinate matters pertaining to the treatment of administrative matters and also to ensure that the remaining staff of the Curia duly fulfill the office entrusted to them.
§ 3 . Unless, in the opinion of the Bishop, the circumstances of the place advise otherwise, the Vicar General or, if there are several, one of the Vicars General must be appointed Moderator of the Curia.
§ 4 . To better promote pastoral action, the Bishop may establish, if he considers it appropriate, an episcopal council, made up of the general and episcopal Vicars.

474
474. The acts of the curia intended to produce legal effect must be signed by the Ordinary from which they come, as a requirement for their validity, as well as by the chancellor of the curia or a notary; The chancellor has the obligation to inform the Moderator of the curia about these acts.

475
475. § 1 . In each diocese, the Bishop must appoint a Vicar General, who, endowed with ordinary power in accordance with the canons that follow, must assist him in the government of the entire diocese.
§ 2 . As a general rule, only one Vicar General must be appointed, unless the size of the diocese, the number of inhabitants or other pastoral reasons advise otherwise.

476
476. When the good government of the diocese requires it, the diocesan Bishop may also appoint one or more episcopal Vicars, who, either in a certain circumscription of the diocese, or for certain matters or with respect to the faithful of the same rite or for a specific group of people, have the same ordinary power that by universal right belongs to the Vicar General, in accordance with the norm of the canons that follow.

477
477. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop freely appoints the Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar and can also freely remove them, subject to what is prescribed in c. 406; The episcopal Vicar who is not an auxiliary Bishop must be appointed only for a certain period, which will be determined in the same act of his appointment.
§ 2 . When the Vicar General is legitimately absent or impeded, the diocesan Bishop may appoint another to take his place; The same norm applies to the Episcopal Vicar.

478
478. § 1 . The Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar must be priests, of no less than thirty years of age, doctors or graduates in canon law or theology or at least truly experts in these matters, and endowed with sound doctrine, honesty, prudence and experience in the management of affairs.
§ 2 . The position of general and episcopal vicar is incompatible with that of penitentiary canon, and cannot be entrusted to blood relatives of the Bishop up to the fourth degree.

479
479. § 1 . By virtue of his office, the Vicar General has the executive power throughout the diocese that corresponds by right to the diocesan Bishop, to carry out any type of administrative acts, except, however, those that the Bishop has reserved for himself or that, according to law, require a special mandate from the Bishop.
§ 2 . The power referred to in the § 1 belongs by right to the Episcopal Vicar, but only for that portion of territory, or with respect to those matters, or faithful of a certain rite or group, for which he has been appointed, except for any actions the Bishop has reserved for himself or the Vicar General, or which according to law require a special mandate from the Bishop.
§ 3 Within their own sphere of competence, the usual faculties granted by the Apostolic See to the Bishop, as well as the execution of the rescripts, also correspond to the Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar, unless otherwise expressly established or the personal qualities of the diocesan Bishop have been taken into consideration.

480
480. The Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar must inform the diocesan Bishop about the most important matters to be resolved or already resolved, and they will never act against the will and intentions of the diocesan Bishop.

481
481. § 1 . The power of the Vicar General and the Episcopal Vicar ceases upon completion of the term of his mandate, by resignation, and also, remaining safe what is prescribed by the cc

482
482. §1 . In each curia, there must be a chancellor, whose main function, unless the particular law establishes otherwise, is to ensure that the minutes of the curia are drawn up, issued and kept in the curia's archive.
§ 2 . When it seems necessary, an assistant to the chancellor, called the vice-chancellor, may be appointed.
§ 3 . The chancellor and vice-chancellor are by right notaries and secretaries of the curia.

483
483. § 1 . In addition to the chancellor, there may be other notaries, whose writing or signature gives public attestation, whether it concerns any type of act, whether only for judicial matters, or only for acts referring to a certain cause or matter.
§ 2 . The chancellor and the notaries must be people of good reputation and above all suspicion; In cases in which the good reputation of a priest may be put on trial, the notary must be a priest.

484
484. The office of notaries consists of:
1 draft the minutes and documents referring to decrees, provisions, obligations and other matters for which your intervention is required;
2 faithfully record everything done in writing, and sign it, indicating the place, day, month and year;
3 show to anyone who legitimately requests them those minutes or documents contained in the registry, and authenticate their copies by declaring them in accordance with the original.

485
485. The chancellor and other notaries can be freely removed from their office by the diocesan Bishop, but not by the diocesan Administrator without the consent of the college of consultants.

486
486. § 1 . All documents that refer to the diocese or parishes must be safeguarded with the greatest diligence.
§ 2 . A diocesan archive or tabular must be established in each curia, in a safe place, in which the documents and writings corresponding to diocesan affairs, both spiritual and temporal, are conserved in clear order and diligently kept.
§ 3 . An inventory or index must be made of the documents kept in the archive, with a brief summary of the content of each writing.

487
487. § 1 The archive must be closed, and only the Bishop and the chancellor must have the key; No one is allowed to enter it without permission from the Bishop, or the Moderator of the curia together with the chancellor.
§ 2 . All interested parties have the right to receive personally or through a solicitor, an authentic copy, written or photocopied, of those documents that, being public by their nature, refer to their personal status.

488
488. It is not permitted to remove documents from the archive, except for a short time and with the consent of the Bishop, or the Moderator of the Curia together with the chancellor.

489
489. § 1 . There must also be a secret archive in the diocesan curia, or at least a closet or a box within the general archive, completely locked and that cannot be moved from the location, where the documents that are to be kept secret are kept with great caution.
§ 2 . Every year the documents of those criminal cases in matters of customs whose inmates have already died, or that have been resolved with a conviction ten years earlier, must be destroyed, and a brief summary of the fact must be preserved along with the text of the final sentence.

490
490. § 1 . Only the Bishop has the key to the secret archive.
§ 2 . While the seat is vacant, the secret archive or closet will not be opened, except in case of true necessity, by the diocesan Administrator personally.
§ 3 . Documents should not be removed from the archive or secret closet.

491
491. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop shall ensure that the records and documents contained in the archives of the cathedral churches, collegiate churches, parishes and other churches in his territory are diligently preserved, and that inventories or indexes are made in double copies, one of which will be kept in his own archive, and the other in the diocesan archive.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop should also ensure that there is a historical archive in the diocese, and that documents that have historical value are carefully stored and organized in a systematic manner.
§ 3 . To examine or remove from their place the minutes and documents referred to in §§ 1 and 2, the norms established by the diocesan Bishop must be observed.

492
492. § 1 . In each diocese, a council of economic affairs must be established, chaired by the diocesan Bishop or his delegate, consisting of at least three faithful designated by the Bishop, who are truly experts in economic matters and civil law, and of proven integrity.
§ 2 . The members of the economic affairs council are appointed for a period of five years, but after that time, the appointment can be renewed for other five-year terms.
§ 3 . Relatives of the Bishop up to the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity are excluded from the council on economic affairs.

493
493. In addition to the functions entrusted to it in Book V Of the temporal goods of the Church, it is the responsibility of the council of economic affairs, in accordance with the instructions received from the Bishop, to prepare each year the budget of income and expenses for the entire regime of the diocese in the coming year, as well as to approve the income and expense accounts at the end of the year.

494
494. § 1 . In each diocese, the Bishop, after hearing the college of consultants and the council of economic affairs, must appoint a treasurer, who is truly an expert in economic matters and of recognized honesty.
§ 2 . The treasurer must be appointed for five years, but the appointment can be renewed for other five-year periods, even more than once, upon expiration of the term; during the time of his position, he should not be removed except for serious reasons, which the Bishop must weigh after hearing the college of consultants and the council of economic affairs.
§ 3 . It is the responsibility of the treasurer, in accordance with the manner determined by the council of economic affairs, to administer the assets of the diocese under the authority of the Bishop and, with the diocese's own income, to make the expenses legitimately ordered by the Bishop or those who have been entrusted by him.
§ 4 . At the end of the year, the treasurer must report income and expenses to the economic affairs council.
494. §§ 3 and 4, the diocesan Bishop may entrust to the treasurer the functions indicated in cc. 1276 § 1 and 1279 § 2 .

495
495. § 1 . In each diocese, the presbyteral council must be constituted, that is, a group of priests that is like the Bishop's senate, representing the presbytery, whose mission is to help the Bishop in the government of the diocese in accordance with the rule of law, to provide as much as possible for the pastoral good of the portion of the people of God that has been entrusted to him.
§ 2 . In apostolic vicariates and apostolic prefectures, the Vicar or Prefect must constitute a council of at least three missionary priests, from whom he receives the opinion, even by letter, on the most serious matters.
495. § 2, the functions of the college of consultants, unless the law provides otherwise.
495. § 2, the Provicar and the Apostolic Proprefect.
§ 2 . The diocesan Administrator, the Pro-Vicar and the Apostolic Pro-Prefect must not give resignations to those who were denied access to orders by the diocesan Bishop or by the Vicar or Apostolic Prefect.

496
496. The presbyteral council must have its own statutes, approved by the diocesan Bishop, taking into account the norms given by the Episcopal Conference.

497
497. Regarding the appointment of the members of the presbyteral council:
1 Approximately half of them must be freely chosen by the priests themselves, in accordance with the norm of the canons that follow and the statutes;
2 some priests, according to the norm of the statutes, must be ex officio members, that is, they belong to the council by virtue of the office entrusted to them;
3 the Bishop has the power to freely appoint other members.

498
498. § 1 . For the constitution of the presbyteral council, the following have both active and passive right of election:
1 all secular priests incardinated in the diocese;
2 those secular priests not incardinated in the diocese, as well as priests who are members of a religious institute or a society of apostolic life, who reside in the diocese and exercise some office for the good of it.
§ 2 . When so determined by the statutes, this same right of election may be granted to other priests who have their domicile or quasi-domicile in the diocese.

499
499. The way of electing the members of the presbyteral council must be determined in the statutes, so that, to the extent possible, the priests of the presbytery are represented, taking into account above all the different ministries and the various regions of the diocese.

500
500. § 1 . It is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop to convene the presbyteral council, preside over it and determine the issues that should be discussed or accept those proposed by the members.
§ 2 . The presbyteral council has only advisory votes; The diocesan Bishop must hear him in matters of greatest importance, but needs his consent only in cases expressly determined by law.
§ 3 . The presbyteral council can never proceed without the diocesan Bishop, who is also exclusively responsible for ensuring that what has been established in accordance with § 2 is made public.

501
501. § 1 . The members of the presbyteral council must be appointed for the term determined in the statutes, in such a way, however, that all or part of the council is renewed every five years.
§ 2 . When the seat becomes vacant, the presbyteral council ceases, and the college of consultants fulfills its functions; The Bishop must reconstitute the presbyteral council within a period of one year from the moment in which he has taken possession.
§ 3 . If the presbyteral council fails to fulfill its entrusted function for the good of the diocese or seriously abuses it, the Bishop, after consulting the Metropolitan, or, if it is the same metropolitan see, the most senior suffragan Bishop due to promotion, may dissolve it, but must constitute it again within a period of one year.

502
502. §3 .
§ 2 . If, for any reason, the diocesan Administrator is not legitimately elected within the established period, his appointment passes to the Metropolitan, and, in the event that the vacant see is precisely the metropolitan, or the metropolitan as well as a suffragan, to the most senior suffragan Bishop according to the order of promotion.
502. § 1 . Among the members of the presbyteral council, the Bishop freely appoints some priests, in number not less than six nor more than twelve, who constitute for five years the college of consultants, which is responsible for the functions determined by law; However, at the end of the five-year period it continues to exercise its functions until a new council is established.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop presides over the college of consultants; When the seat is impeded or vacant, the one who provisionally acts as the Bishop or, if the latter has not yet been constituted, the priest of the oldest college of consultants by his ordination.
§ 3 . The Episcopal Conference may establish that the functions of the college of consultants be entrusted to the cathedral chapter.
§ 4 . In an apostolic vicariate or apostolic prefecture, they are the responsibility of the mission council, which is discussed in c.

503
503. The chapter of canons, cathedral or collegiate, is a college of priests, which is responsible for celebrating the most solemn liturgical functions in the central church or in the collegiate church; It is also the responsibility of the cathedral chapter to carry out those duties that the law or the diocesan Bishop entrusts to it.

505
505. Every chapter, both cathedral and collegiate, must have its own statutes, prepared by legitimate capitular act and approved by the diocesan Bishop; These statutes cannot be modified or abrogated without the approval of the diocesan Bishop.

506
506. § 1 . The statutes of the chapter, always safeguarding the founding laws, will determine its constitution and the number of canons; They will establish what the chapter and each of the canons must do regarding divine worship and the fulfillment of the ministry; They will regulate the meetings in which the affairs of the council are discussed and, always respecting the prescriptions of universal law, they will establish the conditions required for the validity and legality of the acts.
§ 2 . The statutes will also determine the remuneration, which must be received both in a stable manner and on the occasion of the performance of a function, as well as, in accordance with the norms given by the Holy See, what the insignia of the canons are.

507
507. § 1 . There must be one among the canons who presides over the chapter, and other offices will also be designated in accordance with the statutes, also taking into account current usage in the region.
§ 2 . Other offices may also be entrusted to clerics who do not belong to the chapter, with which these clerics assist the canons according to the statutes.

508
508. § 1 . The penitentiary canon, whether of a cathedral church or a collegiate church, has by virtue of his office the ordinary, non-delegable faculty of absolving in the sacramental forum of latae sententiae censures not declared or reserved to the Holy See, even with respect to those who are in the diocese without belonging to it, and with respect to diocesans, even outside its territory.
§ 2 . Where there is no chapter, the diocesan Bishop will appoint a priest to fulfill this same function.

509
509. § 1 . After hearing the chapter, it is up to the diocesan Bishop, but not the diocesan Administrator, to confer each and every one of the canonries, both in the cathedral church and in a collegiate church, any contrary privilege being revoked; It is also up to the Bishop to confirm whoever has been chosen by the council to preside over it.
§ 2 . The Bishop must confer canonries only on priests who, standing out for their doctrine and integrity of life, have carried out their ministry meritorious.

510
510. § 1 . Parishes must not be united again to a chapter of canons, and parishes that were already united to a chapter must be separated from it by the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . In the church that is both parish and capitular, a parish priest must be appointed, whether or not chosen from among the canons; This parish priest has all the duties and all the rights and faculties that, according to the rule of law, are proper to a parish priest.
§ 3 . It is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop to establish fixed norms with which the pastoral obligations of the parish priest and the functions of the chapter are duly adjusted, ensuring that the parish priest does not hinder the capitular functions nor the chapter the parish functions; If there is any conflict, it will be resolved by the diocesan Bishop, who will first ensure that the pastoral needs of the faithful are duly attended to.
§ 4 . Alms to a church that is both parish and capitular are presumed to have been given to the parish, unless otherwise stated.

511
511. To the extent that pastoral circumstances advise, a pastoral council will be constituted in each diocese, whose responsibility is, under the authority of the Bishop, to study and evaluate what concerns pastoral activities in the diocese, and to suggest practical conclusions about them.

512
512. § 1 . The pastoral council is made up of faithful who are in full communion with the Catholic Church, both clerics and members of institutes of consecrated life and above all lay people, who are appointed according to the manner determined by the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . The faithful who are appointed to the pastoral council must be chosen so that through them the portion of the people of God that constitutes the diocese is truly reflected, taking into account their different regions, social and professional conditions, as well as the part they have in the apostolate, both personally and in association with others.
§ 3 . Only faithful who stand out for their secure faith, good morals and prudence should be appointed to the pastoral council.

513
513. § 1 . The pastoral council is constituted for a specific period of time, in accordance with what the statutes given by the Bishop prescribe.
§ 2 . When the seat is vacated, the pastoral council ceases.

514
514. § 1 . It is exclusively the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop, according to the needs of the apostolate, to convene and preside over the pastoral council, which has only advisory votes; It is also solely up to the Bishop to make public what was discussed in the council.
§ 2 . It must be convened at least once a year.

515
515. § 1 The parish is a certain community of faithful constituted in a stable manner in the particular Church, whose pastoral care, under the authority of the diocesan Bishop, is entrusted to a parish priest, as its own pastor.
§ 2 . It is exclusively up to the diocesan Bishop to erect, suppress or change the parishes, but he must not erect, suppress or change them significantly without having heard the presbyteral council.
§ 3 . The legitimately erected parish has legal personality by virtue of the law itself.

516
516. § 1 . Unless the law provides otherwise, the quasi-parish is equated to the parish, which is a specific community of faithful within the particular Church, entrusted, as its own pastor, to a priest, but which, due to peculiar circumstances, has not yet been established as a parish.
§ 2 . When some communities cannot be erected as parishes or quasi-parishes, the diocesan Bishop will provide in another way for the pastoral care of them.

517
517. § 1 . When circumstances so require, the pastoral care of one or more parishes at a time can be entrusted jointly to several priests, provided that one of them is the director of the pastoral care, who directs the joint activity and is responsible for it before the Bishop.
§ 2 . If, due to a shortage of priests, the diocesan Bishop considers that participation in the exercise of the pastoral care of the parish must be entrusted to a deacon or another person who does not have a priestly character, or to a community, he will designate a priest who, endowed with the powers of the parish priest, directs the pastoral activity.
517. § 1, if the pastoral care is entrusted jointly to several.
§ 2 . The entrustment of a parish, which is discussed in § 1, can be carried out both in perpetuity and for a fixed period; In both cases, it will be done through a written agreement between the diocesan Bishop and the competent Superior of the institute or society, in which, among other things, everything that refers to the work to be carried out, the people who will dedicate themselves to it and the financial matters will be expressly and detailedly determined.
517. § 1, the contrary custom being disapproved and all contrary privileges revoked.
517. § 1, the pastoral care of one or several parishes is jointly entrusted:
1 must be endowed with the qualities indicated in c. 521;
2 will be appointed or instituted in accordance with what is prescribed in cc. 522 and 524;
3 take charge of pastoral care only from the moment they take office; The inauguration is granted to its moderator according to the prescriptions of c.
517. § 1, or the moderator thereof, or when one of them becomes incapacitated for the exercise of the pastoral function, this does not mean that the parish or parishes entrusted to the care of the group remain vacant; but it is up to the diocesan Bishop to appoint another moderator and, as long as this is not constituted by the Bishop, the priest of the oldest group by appointment will perform this function.

518
518. As a general rule, the parish must be territorial, that is, it must include all the faithful of a given territory; but, where appropriate, personal parishes will be established based on the rite, language or nationality of the faithful of a territory, or even for another specific reason.

519
519. The parish priest is the proper pastor of the parish entrusted to him, and exercises the pastoral care of the community entrusted to him under the authority of the diocesan Bishop in whose ministry of Christ he has been called to participate, so that in that same community he fulfills the functions of teaching, sanctifying and governing, with the cooperation also of other priests or deacons, and with the help of lay faithful, in accordance with the norm of law.

520
520. § 1 . A parish priest must not be a legal person; but the diocesan Bishop, not the diocesan Administrator, may, with the consent of the competent Superior, entrust a parish to a clerical religious institute or to a clerical society of apostolic life, even erecting the parish in a church of the institute or society, with the condition, however, that a priest be the parish priest of the same or the moderator referred to in the c

521
521. § 1 . In order for someone to be validly appointed as a parish priest, they must have received the sacred orders of the priesthood.
§ 2 . He must also stand out for his sound doctrine and moral probity, be endowed with zeal for souls and other virtues, and have the qualities that are required by both universal and particular law, for the care of the parish in question.
§ 3 . For someone to be appointed to the office of parish priest, it is necessary that his suitability be confirmed with certainty according to the manner established by the diocesan Bishop, including through an examination.

522
522. The parish priest must have stability and therefore must be appointed for an indefinite period; He can only be appointed by the diocesan Bishop for a specific period of time, if this method of procedure has been admitted, by decree, by the Episcopal Conference.

523
523. Subject to the provisions of the c

524
524. The diocesan Bishop must entrust the parish that has become vacant to the one who, considering all the circumstances, he considers suitable to carry out the parish priest there, leaving aside any respect for persons; To judge the suitability, listen to the archpriest and carry out the appropriate investigations, asking for the opinion, if the case warrants it, of some priests and lay faithful.

525
525. When the see is vacant or impeded, it is up to the diocesan Administrator or the person who provisionally governs the diocese:
1 granting institution or confirmation to priests who have been legitimately presented or elected to a parish;
2 appoint parish priests, if a year has already passed since the see became vacant or impeded.

526
526. § 1 . The parish priest must have the care of a single parish; However, due to a shortage of priests or other circumstances, the same priest can be entrusted with the care of several nearby parishes.
§ 2 . In each parish there must be only one pastor or director according to the norm of c.

527
527. § 1 . Whoever has been promoted to carry out the pastoral care of a parish obtains it and is obliged to exercise it from the moment he takes possession.
§ 2 . Possession is granted to the parish priest by the local Ordinary or a priest delegated by him, according to the manner received by particular law or legitimate custom; However, the same Ordinary may, with just cause, dispense from observance in this way, in which case, the notification of the dispensation serves as the taking of possession.
§ 3 . The local Ordinary will determine the time within which possession of the parish must be taken; and, if this passes without effect, lacking a just impediment, he can declare the parish vacant.
527. § 2 and, for other priests, the legitimately issued profession of faith serves as the taking of possession.

528
528. § 1 . The parish priest is obliged to ensure that the word of God is announced in its entirety to those who live in the parish; Take care therefore that the lay faithful are indoctrinated in the truths of the faith, especially through the homily, which must be given on Sundays and holy days of obligation, and catechetical formation; It must encourage initiatives that promote the evangelical spirit, also with regard to social justice; It must particularly seek the Catholic formation of children and young people and strive with all possible means, also with the collaboration of the faithful, so that the evangelical message also reaches those who have stopped practicing or do not profess the true faith.
§ 2 . The parish priest should strive to make the most holy Eucharist the center of the parish community of faithful; work so that the faithful are nourished with the pious celebration of the sacraments, in a peculiar way with the frequent reception of the most holy Eucharist and penance; Try to move them to prayer, also within families, and to conscious and active participation in the sacred liturgy, which, under the authority of the diocesan Bishop, the parish priest must moderate in his parish, with the obligation to monitor so that abuses are not introduced.

529
529. § 1 . To diligently fulfill his pastoral function, the parish priest should seek to know the faithful entrusted to him; To this end, he will visit families, participating in a particular way in the concerns, anguish and pain of the faithful due to the death of loved ones, comforting them in the Lord and prudently correcting them if they deviate from good behavior; He must help the sick with lavish charity, especially the dying, diligently strengthening them with the administration of the sacraments and entrusting their soul to God; It must be dedicated with particular diligence to the poor, the afflicted, those who are alone, emigrants or those who suffer special difficulties; and it must also provide the means so that spouses and parents are helped in the fulfillment of their own duties and Christian life is encouraged within families.
§ 2 . Let the parish priest recognize and promote the proper role of the lay faithful in the mission of the Church, encouraging their associations for religious purposes. Cooperate with your own Bishop and with the diocesan presbytery, also striving to ensure that the faithful live parish communion and feel at the same time members of the diocese and the universal Church, and take part in initiatives that aim to foster this communion and consolidate it.
529. and 530; The power to assist at marriages, as well as all the powers of dispensation granted by law to the parish priest, are the responsibility of all of them, but must be exercised under the direction of the moderator.
§ 2 . All priests who belong to the group:
1 are obliged to comply with the residence law;
2 will determine by common agreement the order according to which one of them will celebrate the Mass for the people, in accordance with c. 534;
3 in legal affairs, only the moderator represents the parish or parishes entrusted to the group.

530
530. The following are functions that are especially entrusted to the parish priest:
1 the administration of baptism;
2 the administration of the sacrament of confirmation to those who are in danger of death, in accordance with the norm of c. 883, 3;
3 the administration of Viaticum and the anointing of the sick without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 1003 §§ 2 and 3; likewise, impart the apostolic blessing;
4 attendance at marriages and wedding blessing;
5 the celebration of funerals;
6 the blessing of the baptismal font at Easter time, the presidency of the processions outside the church and the solemn blessings outside the church;
7 the most solemn Eucharistic celebration on Sundays and holy days of obligation.

531
531. Even if another has performed a certain parish function, the oblations received from the faithful on that occasion will be included in the parish mass, unless, with respect to voluntary alms, the contrary intention of the person offering them is evident; It is up to the diocesan Bishop, after hearing the presbyteral council, to establish norms by which the destination of these oblations is provided and as well as the remuneration of the clerics who fulfill that function.

532
532. The parish priest represents the parish in all legal transactions, in accordance with the rule of law; He must ensure that the assets of the parish are administered in accordance with the norms of the ccs. 1281-1288.

533
533. § 1 . The priest has the obligation to reside in the parish house, near the church; However, when in particular cases there is a just cause, the local Ordinary may allow him to live in another place, especially in a common house of several priests, as long as adequate and effective provision is made for the fulfillment of parish tasks.
§ 2 . Unless there is a serious reason, the parish priest may be absent from the parish, as a vacation, for a maximum of one continuous or interrupted month; But this vacation time does not include the days during which the parish priest attends the spiritual retreat once a year; However, to be absent from the parish for more than a week, the parish priest has the obligation to notify the local Ordinary.
§ 3 . It is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop to establish the norms according to which, during the absence of the parish priest, the care of the parish is provided by a priest endowed with the appropriate faculties.
533. § 3, and a parish Administrator has not been established, what is prescribed in c. 541 § 1 ; In this case, the vicar has all the obligations of the parish priest, except that of applying the Mass for the people.

534
534. § 1 . Once he has taken possession of the parish, the parish priest is obliged to perform the Mass for the people entrusted to him on all Sundays and holidays that are obligatory in his diocese; Anyone who is legitimately prevented from doing so will apply it on those same days through another person, or on other days personally.
§ 2 . On the days indicated in the § 1, the parish priest to whom the care of several parishes has been entrusted is obliged to hold a single Mass for the entire town entrusted to him.
§ 3 . The parish priest who has failed to fulfill the obligation referred to in §§ 1 and 2 must apply as soon as possible for the people as many Masses as he has omitted.

535
535. § 1 . In each parish, parish books must be kept, that is, of baptized people, of marriages and of the deceased, and those others prescribed by the Episcopal Conference or by the diocesan Bishop; Let the parish priest ensure that these books are accurately noted and diligently kept.
§ 2 . n In the book of the baptized, the affiliation to a sui iuris Church or the transition to another Church will also be noted, as well as confirmation and everything that refers to the canonical status of the faithful by reason of marriage, leaving aside what is prescribed in c. 1133, by reason of adoption, reception of sacred orders and perpetual profession issued in a religious institute; and these notations must always be recorded in the baptism certificate.
§ 3 . Each parish must have its own seal; The certificates that refer to the canonical status of the faithful, as well as other acts that may have legal value, must bear the signature of the parish priest or his delegate, and the parish seal.
§ 4 . In every parish there must be a shelf or archive, where the parish books are kept, together with the letters of the Bishops and other documents that must be preserved for reasons of necessity or usefulness; All of this must be reviewed by the diocesan Bishop or his delegate during visiting time or on another opportune occasion, and the parish priest must ensure that it does not end up in strange hands.
§ 5 . The oldest parish books must also be diligently preserved, according to the prescriptions of particular law.
535. § 2 .

536
536. § 1 . If it is appropriate, in the opinion of the diocesan Bishop, after hearing the presbyteral council, a pastoral council will be established in each parish, chaired by the parish priest and in which the faithful, together with those who participate through their office in the pastoral care of the parish, lend their collaboration for the promotion of pastoral activity.
§ 2 . The pastoral council has a purely advisory vote, and is governed by the norms established by the diocesan Bishop.

537
537. In every parish there must be a council of economic affairs that is governed, in addition to universal law, by the norms established by the diocesan Bishop, and in which the faithful, elected according to those norms, lend their help to the parish priest in the administration of the parish's assets, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 532.

538
538. § 1 . The parish priest ceases in his office due to the removal or transfer made by the diocesan Bishop in accordance with the norm of law, by resignation presented by the parish priest with just cause, which, for its validity, must be accepted by the Bishop; also because time has elapsed, if, according to the prescriptions of the particular law referred to in c. 522, would have been established for a specific time.
§ 2 . The removal of a parish priest who is a member of a religious institute or incardinated in a society of apostolic life is governed by the norms of Can. 682, § 2.
§ 3 . The parish priest, once he reaches seventy-five years of age, is asked to present the resignation to the diocesan Bishop, who, weighing all the circumstances of the person and the place, will decide whether he should accept it or defer it; The diocesan Bishop must provide for the appropriate support and housing of those who resign, taking into account the norms established by the Episcopal Conference.

539
539. When a parish becomes vacant or the parish priest is unable to exercise the pastoral function in it, due to captivity, banishment or deportation, incapacity, illness or other cause, the diocesan Bishop must provide as soon as possible with a parish administrator, that is, a priest who replaces the parish priest, in accordance with the norm of c. 540.

540
540. § 1 . The parish administrator has the same duties and rights as the parish priest, unless the diocesan Bishop establishes otherwise.
§ 2 . It is not lawful for the parish administrator to do anything that could harm the rights of the parish priest or cause damage to parish property.
§ 3 . Once his task is completed, the parish administrator must report to the parish priest.

541
541. § 1 . When a parish becomes vacant, or the parish priest is prevented from exercising his pastoral function, until the parish administrator is established, the parish vicar provisionally assumes the regime of the parish; If there are several, the oldest by appointment, and, where there are no vicars, the parish priest determined by particular law.
§ 2 . Whoever takes charge of the regime of a parish according to the norm of § 1 must immediately inform the local Ordinary about the vacancy of the parish.

542
542. Priests who, according to the c

543
543. § 1 . If priests are jointly entrusted with the pastoral care of a parish or several parishes at the same time, each of them, according to the distribution established by themselves, has the obligation to carry out the duties and functions of the parish priest in question in the ccs. 528,

544
544. When one of the priests of the group mentioned in the c

545
545. § 1 . When necessary or appropriate for the proper performance of the pastoral care of a parish, in addition to the parish priest, there may be one or more parochial vicars who, as collaborators of the parish priest and participants in his care, united with the parish priest by the same will and commitment, work under his authority in the pastoral ministry.
§ 2 . A parochial vicar can be established either to help in the performance of the entire pastoral ministry in a parish or in a certain part of it or to a specific group, or to assign him to a specific ministry that must be carried out at the same time in several parishes.

546
546. For someone to be validly appointed parochial vicar, he or she must have received the sacred order of the priesthood.

547
547. The diocesan Bishop freely appoints the parochial vicar, after hearing, if he deems it appropriate, the parish priest or priests of the parishes for which it is established, and also the archpriest, without prejudice to the provisions of the c

548
548. § 1 . The obligations and rights of the parochial vicar are determined by the canons of this chapter, and also by the diocesan statutes and the document of the diocesan Bishop, and especially by the mandate of the parish priest.
§ 2 . If nothing else is established in the document of the diocesan Bishop, the parochial vicar, by reason of his office, has the obligation to assist the parish priest in the fulfillment of the entire parish ministry, except the application of the Mass by the people, and to replace the parish priest, if necessary, in accordance with the law.
§ 3 . The parochial vicar must regularly inform the parish priest about the pastoral initiatives planned or undertaken, so that the parish priest and the vicar or vicars can provide in unity of efforts for the pastoral care of the parish, for which they are jointly responsible.

549
549. In the absence of the parish priest, if the diocesan Bishop has not provided otherwise in accordance with the norm of the c

550
550. § 1 . The parochial vicar is obliged to live in the parish, or in one of them, if it has been established for several; However, for just cause, the local Ordinary may allow him to reside elsewhere, especially in the house where several priests live together, as long as the fulfillment of pastoral functions does not suffer any harm.
§ 2 . When possible, the local Ordinary should ensure that the parish priest and the vicars have a certain coexistence in the parish house.
§ 3 . As regards vacation time, the parochial vicar has the same right as the parish priest.

551
551. Regarding the oblations that the faithful give to the vicar on the occasion of the pastoral ministry carried out, the prescriptions of c. 531.

552
552. With just cause, the parochial vicar may be removed by the diocesan Bishop or by the diocesan Administrator, without prejudice to what is prescribed by the c

553
553. § 1 . The archpriest, also called foreign vicar, dean or otherwise, is a priest who is placed in charge of an archpriest.
§ 2 . Unless particular law establishes otherwise, the archpriest is appointed by the diocesan Bishop, after hearing, according to his prudent judgment, the priests who exercise the ministry in the archpriest in question.

554
554. § 1 . For the office of archpriest, which is not linked to that of parish priest of a specific parish, the Bishop must choose that priest whom he considers suitable according to the circumstances of place and time.
§ 2 . The archpriest must be appointed for a specific period of time, which will be specified in the particular law.
§ 3 . According to his prudent discretion, the diocesan Bishop may, with just cause, freely remove an archpriest from his office.

555
555. § 1 . In addition to the powers that are legitimately attributed to him by private law, the archpriest has the duty and right:
1 to promote and coordinate common pastoral activity in the archpriestship;
2 to see that the clergy of his district live in a manner in accordance with their state and diligently fulfill their duties;
3 to ensure that religious functions are celebrated according to the prescriptions of the sacred liturgy; the decorum and splendor of the churches and of the sacred objects and ornaments are diligently cared for, especially in the Eucharistic celebration and in the custody of the Blessed Sacrament; parish books are completed and stored appropriately; ecclesiastical assets are diligently administered; and the parish house is preserved with due diligence.
§ 2 . In the archpriestship entrusted to him, the archpriest:
1 ensure that clerics, according to the prescriptions of particular law and at the times determined by it, attend conferences, theological meetings or colloquiums, in accordance with the norm of c.

556
556. Church rectors are here understood as those priests who are entrusted, to celebrate services there, with the care of a church that is not parochial or capitular, nor is it attached to the house of a religious community or a society of apostolic life.

557
557. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop freely appoints the rector of a church, without prejudice to the right of election or presentation, when this legitimately concerns someone; In this case, it is up to the diocesan Bishop to confirm or establish the rector.
§ 2 . Although the church belongs to a clerical religious institute of pontifical right, it is up to the diocesan Bishop to confer the institution on the rector presented by the Superior.
§ 3 . The rector of the Seminary or of a college run by clergy is also rector of the church attached to the Seminary or college, unless the diocesan Bishop has established otherwise.

558
558. Without prejudice to the provisions of c. 262, the rector cannot carry out in the church entrusted to him the parish functions referred to in c. 530, nos. 1-6 without the consent or, if necessary, the delegation of the parish priest.

559
559. In the church entrusted to him, the rector can also celebrate solemn liturgical functions, keeping the legitimate laws of foundation safe, and provided that, in the opinion of the local Ordinary, they in no way cause harm to the parish ministry.

560
560. When it seems appropriate, the local Ordinary can order the rector to celebrate certain functions for the people, including parish ones, and also that the church be open to specific groups of faithful, so that they can celebrate liturgical functions there.

561
561. Without permission from the rector or other legitimate superior, no one is permitted to celebrate the Eucharist, administer sacraments or perform other sacred functions in the church; This license must be granted or denied in accordance with the rule of law.

562
562. Under the authority of the local Ordinary and respecting the legitimate statutes and acquired rights, the rector of the church has the duty to ensure that the sacred functions are celebrated there with dignity, in accordance with the liturgical norms and the prescriptions of the canons, that the charges are faithfully fulfilled, the goods are diligently administered, the conservation and decorum of the sacred objects and buildings are provided for, and nothing is done that would any way detracts from the sanctity of the place and the respect due to the house of God.

563
563. With just cause and according to his prudent discretion, the local Ordinary may remove the rector of a church from his office, even if he had been elected or presented by others, remaining firm what is prescribed by the c

564
564. The chaplain is a priest who is stably entrusted, at least in part, with the pastoral care of some community or group of faithful, so that he may exercise it in accordance with universal and particular law.

565
565. The chaplain is appointed by the local Ordinary, who is also responsible for instituting the one presented to him or confirming the one chosen, if nothing else is established by law or other special rights do not legitimately apply to anyone.

566
566. § 1 . The chaplain must be provided with all the powers required for good pastoral care. In addition to those granted by private right or special delegation, the chaplain, by reason of his position, has the power to hear the confessions of the faithful entrusted to his care, preach the word of God to them, administer Viaticum and the anointing of the sick, and also confer the sacrament of confirmation on those who are in danger of death.
§ 2 . In hospitals, prisons and maritime voyages, the chaplain also has the power, which he can only exercise in those places, to absolve from unreserved or undeclared latae sententiae censures, remaining firm, however, as prescribed in c. 976.

567
567. § 1 . The local Ordinary must not proceed with the appointment of chaplain of the house of a lay religious institute without consulting the Superior, who has the right, after hearing the community, to propose a priest.
§ 2 . It is the chaplain's responsibility to celebrate or organize liturgical functions, but he is not allowed to interfere in the internal regime of the institute.

568
568. To the extent possible, chaplains should be established for those who, due to their lifestyle, cannot enjoy ordinary parish care, such as emigrants, exiles, refugees, nomads, and sailors.

569
569. Military chaplains are governed by special laws.

570
570. If there is a non-parish church attached to the headquarters of a community or group, the rector of the same church shall be the chaplain, unless the care of the community or the church requires otherwise.

571
571. The chaplain must maintain due union with the parish priest in the performance of his pastoral function.

572
572. Regarding the removal of the chaplain, observe the provisions of c. 563.

573
573. § 1 . The life consecrated by the profession of the evangelical counsels is a stable way of living in which the faithful, following Christ more closely under the action of the Holy Spirit, dedicate themselves totally to God as to their supreme love, so that, given by a new and peculiar title to his glory, to the edification of the Church and the salvation of the world, they achieve the perfection of charity in the service of the Kingdom of God and, having become a clear sign in the Church, they announce heavenly glory.
§ 2 . This form of life is freely adopted in institutes of canonically consecrated life erected by the competent authority of the Church by those faithful who, through vows or other sacred bonds, according to the laws proper to the institutes, profess the evangelical counsels of chastity, poverty and obedience, and, by the charity to which these lead, are united in a special way to the Church and its mystery.

574
574. § 1 . The status of those who profess the evangelical counsels in these institutes belongs to the life and holiness of the Church, and therefore everyone in the Church must support and promote it.
§ 2 . God especially calls some faithful to this state, so that they may enjoy this peculiar gift in the life of the Church and favor its saving mission in accordance with the purpose and spirit of the institute.

575
575. The evangelical counsels, founded on the doctrine and example of Christ the Master, are a divine gift that the Church has received from the Lord and always preserves with His grace.

576
576. It is up to the competent authority of the Church to interpret the evangelical counsels, regulate their practice with laws and determine through canonical approval the stable ways of living them, as well as to ensure that the institutes grow and flourish according to the spirit of their founders and healthy traditions.

577
577. In the Church there are many institutes of consecrated life, which have received diverse gifts, according to the grace proper to each one: for they follow Christ more closely when he prays, when he announces the Kingdom of God, when he does good to men, and when he lives with them in the world, although always fulfilling the will of the Father.

578
578. Everyone must faithfully observe the mind and purposes of the founders, corroborated by the competent ecclesiastical authority, regarding the nature, purpose, spirit and character of each institute, as well as its healthy traditions, all of which constitutes the heritage of the institute.

579
579. n In their own territory, diocesan Bishops may erect institutes of consecrated life by formal decree, with prior written permission given by the Apostolic See.
579. In their own territory, diocesan Bishops may erect institutes of consecrated life by formal decree, provided that the Apostolic See has been previously consulted.
[New paragraph introduced by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf., Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Competentias quasdam decernere of February 11, 2022)]:

580
580. The aggregation of one institute of consecrated life to another is reserved to the competent authority of the institute that aggregates, without prejudice to the autonomy of the added institute.

581
581. It is the responsibility of the competent authority of an institute, in accordance with the constitutions, to divide it into circumscriptions, whatever their name, to erect new ones and to unite those already erected or to delimit them in another way.

582
582. Mergers and unions of institutes of consecrated life are reserved exclusively to the Apostolic See; and likewise confederations and federations are reserved for him.

583
583. In institutes of consecrated life, modifications that affect what is approved by it cannot be introduced without permission from the Apostolic See.

584
584. It is exclusively the responsibility of the Apostolic See to suppress an institute, and it is also reserved to it to decide on its temporal goods.

585
585. The suppression of parts of an institute corresponds to the competent authority thereof.

586
586. § 1 . Each of the institutes is recognized with a fair autonomy of life, especially in government, so that they have their own discipline within the Church, and can preserve in its entirety their own patrimony referred to in c. 578.
§ 2 . It is up to the local Ordinaries to preserve and defend this autonomy.

587
587. § 1 . To more faithfully defend the vocation and identity of each institute, the fundamental code or constitutions of each of them must contain, in addition to what is ordered to be observed in c. 578, the fundamental norms on the government of the institute and the discipline of its members, their incorporation and training, as well as the proper object of the sacred bonds.
§ 2 . This code is approved by the competent authority of the Church, and can only be modified with its consent.
§ 3 . In this code, the spiritual and legal elements must be appropriately harmonized; but norms should not be multiplied unnecessarily.
§ 4 . The other standards established by the competent authority of the institute will be conveniently included in other codes, standards that can be reviewed and adjusted when appropriate, according to the demands of the places and times.

588
588. § 1 . The state of consecrated life, by its nature, is neither clerical nor lay.
§ 2 . A clerical institute is called one that, taking into account the end or purpose desired by its founder or by legitimate tradition, is under the direction of clerics (Cf.

Rescriptum ex Audientia Ss.mi: Rescript of the Holy Father 
on the repeal of Can. 588 §2 CIC, May 18, 2022 – 
Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies 
of Apostolic Life), assumes the exercise of sacred order and is recognized as such by the authority of the Church.
§ 3 . A lay institute is called one that, recognized as such by the authority of the Church, by virtue of its nature, nature and purpose, has its own function determined by the founder or by legitimate tradition that does not include the exercise of sacred orders.

589
589. An institute of consecrated life is called pontifical right when it has been erected by the Apostolic See or approved by it by formal decree; and of diocesan right, when, having been erected by a diocesan Bishop, it has not received the decree of approval from the Apostolic See.

590
590. § 1 . The institutes of consecrated life, precisely because they are dedicated in a special way to the service of God and the entire Church, are subject for a peculiar reason to the supreme authority of the Church.
§ 2 . Each of its members is obliged to obey the Supreme Pontiff, as his supreme Superior, also by virtue of the sacred bond of obedience.

591
591. To better provide for the good of the institutes and the needs of the apostolate, the Supreme Pontiff, by virtue of his primacy over the entire Church and in attention to the common utility, can exempt the institutes of consecrated life from the regime of the local Ordinaries, and subject them exclusively to himself or to another ecclesiastical authority.

592
592. § 1 . To better promote the communion of the institutes with the Apostolic See, every Supreme Moderator must send to the latter in the manner and at the time determined by it a brief report on the situation and life of the institute.
§ 2 . The Moderators of each institute promote knowledge of the documents of the Holy See that affect the members who depend on them, and ensure their observance.

593
593. Without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 586, the institutes of pontifical right depend immediately and exclusively on the power of the Apostolic See, with regard to internal regime and discipline.

594
594. An institute of diocesan law, leaving c. 586, is under the special care of the diocesan Bishop.

595
595. § 1 . It is up to the Bishop of the main see to approve the constitutions and confirm the amendments that are legitimately introduced in them, except for those in which the Apostolic See has put its hands, as well as to deal with the most important matters that refer to the entire institute and are above the power of the internal authority, consulting however the other diocesan Bishops, if the institute has extended to different dioceses.
§ 2 . In particular cases, the diocesan Bishop can dispense from the constitutions.

596
596. § 1 . The Superiors and chapters of the institutes have the power over the members determined by universal law and the constitutions.
§ 2 . In the clerical religious institutes of pontifical right they also have ecclesiastical power of regime, both for the external and internal forum.
§ 3 . The prescriptions of ccs apply to the power discussed in § 1. 131, 133 and 137-144.

597
597. § 1 . Any Catholic of right intention who has the qualities required by universal law and by his own law, and is free of impediment, may be admitted to an institute of consecrated life.
§ 2 . No one can be admitted without adequate preparation.

598
598. § 1 . Taking into account its own character and purposes, each institute must determine in its constitutions the way of observing the evangelical counsels of chastity, poverty and obedience, in accordance with its way of life.
§ 2 . All members must not only faithfully and fully observe the evangelical counsels, but also organize their lives according to the law proper to the institute, and thus strive to achieve the perfection of their state.

599
599. The evangelical counsel of chastity assumed by the Kingdom of heaven, which is a sign of the future world and source of more abundant fertility in an undivided heart, carries with it the obligation to observe perfect continence in celibacy.

600
600. The evangelical counsel of poverty, in imitation of Christ, who, being rich, became indigent for us, in addition to a life poor in fact and in spirit, vigorously sober and detached from earthly riches, carries with it dependence and limitation in the use and disposition of goods, in accordance with the norm of the law proper to each institute.

601
601. The evangelical counsel of obedience, embraced with a spirit of faith and love in the following of Christ obedient to death, obliges one to submit one's will to the legitimate Superiors, who act as God, when they command something according to one's own constitutions.

602
602. The fraternal life, proper to each institute, by which all members are united in Christ as in a peculiar family, must be determined in such a way that it is mutual help for all in the fulfillment of their own personal vocation. Through fraternal communion, rooted and founded in charity, members are to be an example of universal reconciliation in Christ.

603
603. § 1 . In addition to the institutes of consecrated life, the Church recognizes the eremitic or anchoretic life, in which the faithful, with a stricter separation from the world, the silence of solitude, assiduous prayer and penance, dedicate their lives to the praise of God and the salvation of the world.
§ 2 . A hermit is recognized by law as devoted to God within the consecrated life, if he publicly professes the three evangelical counsels, corroborated by vote or other sacred bond, in the hands of the diocesan Bishop, and follows his own way of life under his direction.

604
604. § 1 . These forms of consecrated life are similar to the order of virgins, who, formulating the holy purpose of following Christ more closely, are consecrated to God by the diocesan Bishop according to the approved liturgical rite, celebrate mystical betrothal with Jesus Christ, Son of God, and dedicate themselves to the service of the Church.
§ 2 . Virgins can associate, to fulfill their purpose with greater fidelity and to carry out, through mutual aid, service to the Church consistent with their own state.
§ 3 . n The admission and erection of such associations at the diocesan level is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop, within the scope of his territory; At the national level it is the responsibility of the Episcopal Conference, within its own territory.
604. § 3

605
605. The approval of new forms of consecrated life is reserved exclusively to the Apostolic See. However, diocesan Bishops must seek to discern the new gifts of consecrated life granted to the Church by the Holy Spirit and help those who promote them to formulate their purposes in the best possible way and protect them through appropriate statutes, applying above all the general norms contained in this part.

606
606. What is established about the institutes of consecrated life and their members is valid with equal rights for both sexes, unless otherwise stated by the context or by the very nature of the matter.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Authenticum charismatis, dated November 1, 2020)]:

607
607. § 1 . Religious life, as a total consecration of the person, manifests the admirable espousal established by God in the Church, a sign of the future life. In this way the religious completes the full donation of himself as a sacrifice offered to God, through which his entire existence becomes continuous worship of God in charity.
§ 2 . A religious institute is a society in which the members, according to their own law, issue perpetual public vows, or temporary vows that must however be renewed upon expiration of the term, and live a fraternal life in common.
§ 3 . The public testimony that religious people must give to Christ and the Church entails a separation from the world that is typical of the character and purpose of each institute.

608
608. The religious community must live in a legitimately constituted house, under the authority of the Superior designated in accordance with the rule of law; Each house must have at least one oratory, in which the Eucharist is celebrated and reserved, so that it is truly the center of the community.

609
609. § 1 . The houses of a religious institute are erected by the competent authority according to the constitutions, with the prior consent of the diocesan Bishop, given in writing.
§ 2 . To erect a monastery of nuns, a license from the Apostolic See is also required.

610
610. § 1 . The erection of the houses is done taking into account the usefulness of the Church and the institute, and ensuring everything that is necessary for the members to properly live the religious life, according to the proper purposes and the spirit of the institute.
§ 2 . No religious house shall be erected unless it is prudently anticipated that the needs of the members can be adequately served.

611
611. The consent of the diocesan Bishop to erect a house of a religious institute carries with it the right to:
1 live according to the character and purposes of the institute;
2 carry out the institute's own works in accordance with the rule of law, respecting the conditions set when granting consent;
3 clerical institutes have a church, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c.

612
612. The consent of the diocesan Bishop is required so that a religious house can be used for apostolic works other than those for which it was established; but not if it is a change that, leaving the founding laws safe, affects only the government and internal discipline.

613
613. § 1 . A religious house of regular canons or monks under the regime and care of its own Superior is autonomous, unless the constitutions determine otherwise.
§ 2 . The Superior of an autonomous house is by right a major Superior.

614
614. Monasteries of nuns associated with a men's institute maintain their own way of life and government in accordance with the constitutions. Reciprocal rights and obligations must be determined so that such association can serve spiritual good.

615
615. The autonomous monastery which, apart from its own Superior, does not have another major Superior, nor is it associated with an institute of religious such that its Superior has true power over said monastery, determined by the constitutions, is entrusted to the peculiar supervision of the diocesan Bishop, in accordance with the norm of law.
615. They must report to the local Ordinary once a year; The local Ordinary also has the right to know the financial situation of a religious house of diocesan law.

616
616. §1 . A legitimately erected religious house can be suppressed by the Superior General, in accordance with the norm of the constitutions and after consulting the diocesan Bishop. The institute's own law must provide for the assets of the suppressed house, leaving the will of the founders or donors and the legitimately acquired rights safe.
§ 2 . The suppression of a house that is the only one of an institute corresponds to the Holy See; to whom it is also reserved, where appropriate, to decide on the destination of the assets.
§ 3 . Unless the constitutions say otherwise, it is up to the General Chapter to suppress the autonomous house referred to in c. 613.
§ 4 . It is up to the Apostolic See to suppress an autonomous monastery of nuns, observing what the constitutions prescribe regarding property.

617
617. Superiors must fulfill their function and exercise their power in accordance with proper and universal law.

618
618. Superiors should exercise in a spirit of service the power they have received from God through the ministry of the Church. Therefore, showing themselves docile to the will of God in the fulfillment of their function, they govern their subjects as children of God, encouraging their voluntary obedience with respect for the human person, listen to them willingly and encourage their initiatives for the good of the institute and the Church, always remaining safe, however, in their authority to decide and command what must be done.

619
619. Superiors must diligently dedicate themselves to their office and, in union with the members entrusted to them, must seek to build a fraternal community in Christ, in which, above all, God is sought and loved. Therefore nourish the members with the frequent nourishment of the word of God and induce them to celebrate the sacred liturgy. They must give them an example in the exercise of virtues and in the observance of the laws and traditions of the institute itself; Help them appropriately with their personal needs, care for and visit the sick, correct the unruly, console the faint-hearted, and be patient with everyone.

620
620. Major Superiors are those who govern the entire institute, a province of it or another part equivalent to it, or an autonomous house, as well as its vicars. To these are added the Primate Abbot and the Superior of a monastic congregation, who, however, do not have all the power that universal law attributes to major Superiors.

621
621. The group of several houses canonically erected by the legitimate authority that forms an immediate part of an institute, under the same Superior, is called a province.

622
622. The Superior General has power, which he must exercise according to his own law, over all the provinces, houses and members of the institute; the other Superiors have it within the limits of their position.

623
623. For members to be validly appointed or elected to the position of Superior, it is required that a suitable time has elapsed since their perpetual or definitive profession, determined in the proper law or, in the case of major Superiors, by the constitutions.

624
624. § 3 .
§ 3 . He may be removed, for just cause in the judgment of the competent authority, to whom, according to the prescriptions of law, an office has been conferred for a time that is left to the prudent discretion of the authority.
§ 4 . For the removal decree to take effect, it must be communicated in writing.
624. § 1 . The Superiors must be appointed for a determined and convenient period of time, according to the nature and needs of the institute, unless the constitutions establish otherwise with regard to the Superior General or the Superiors of an autonomous house.
§ 2 . The proper law must provide through adequate regulations so that Superiors appointed for a specific period do not hold government positions for a long time and without interruption.
§ 3 . They may, however, be removed from the position they hold or transferred to another, for reasons determined in their own law.

625
625. § 1 . The Superior General of an institute must be appointed by canonical election, in accordance with the constitutions.
§ 2 . The Bishop of the main see presides over the election of the Superior of the autonomous monastery referred to in c. 615, and the Superior General of a diocesan law institute.
§ 3 . The other Superiors must be appointed in accordance with the constitutions, so that, if they are elected, they need confirmation from the competent major Superior; and if they are appointed by the Superior, an appropriate consultation precedes them.

626
626. Both the Superiors when conferring the offices and the members in the elections must observe the norms of universal law and their own, and must abstain from any abuse and respect of persons and, keeping in mind only God and the good of the institute, they will appoint or elect those who they consider in the Lord truly worthy and suitable. In elections, moreover, they will avoid capturing votes, directly or indirectly, both for themselves and for others.

627
627. § 1 . In accordance with the norm of the constitutions, the Superiors have their own council, whose collaboration they must use in the exercise of their office.
§ 2 . In addition to the cases prescribed in universal law, proper law will determine the occasions on which, to act validly, consent or advice is required, which must be requested in accordance with the rule of c. 127.

628
628. § 1 . The superiors designated for this function by the proper law of the institute will visit the houses and the members entrusted to their care at the established times, according to the prescriptions of the same proper law.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop has the right and duty to visit, also with regard to religious discipline:
1 the autonomous monasteries discussed in c. 615;
2 all the houses of an institute of diocesan law that are within its territory.
§ 3 . The members must deal with confidence with the visitor, and respond truthfully and with charity when he asks them something legitimately; and no one is permitted to hinder in any way the members from fulfilling this obligation or otherwise impede the purpose of the visit.

629
629. The Superiors reside in their own house, and do not leave it except in accordance with their own law.

630
630. § 1 . The Superiors grant the members due freedom with regard to the sacrament of penance and spiritual direction, without prejudice to the discipline of the institute.
§ 2 . In accordance with the norm of proper law, Superiors must be solicitous so that members have suitable confessors with whom they can confess frequently.
§ 3 . In monasteries of nuns, houses of formation and larger lay communities, there must be ordinary confessors approved by the local Ordinary, after an exchange of opinions with the community, but without imposing the obligation to go to them.
§ 4 . Superiors should not hear the confessions of their subjects, unless they spontaneously request it.
§ 5 . Members must go with confidence to their Superiors, to whom they can open their hearts freely and spontaneously. However, Superiors are prohibited from inducing members in any way to express their conscience to them.
630. § 4 .

631
631. § 1 . The general chapter, which holds supreme authority in the institute in accordance with the constitutions, must be constituted in such a way that, representing the entire institute, it is a true sign of its unity in charity. Above all, it is responsible for defending the heritage of the institute, which is dealt with in c. 578, and seek accommodation and renewal in accordance with it, elect the Superior General, deal with the most important matters, as well as dictate norms that are obligatory for all.
§ 2 . The composition and scope of power of the chapter must be determined in the constitutions; The proper law will also establish the way of proceeding in the celebration of the chapter, especially with respect to elections and the way of conducting affairs.
§ 3 . According to the norms determined in the proper law, not only the provinces and local communities, but also each member can freely send their wishes and suggestions to the general chapter.

632
632. The proper law must determine precisely which matters correspond to other chapters of the institute or to similar assemblies, with regard to their nature, authority, composition, procedure and time in which they must be held.

633
633. § 1 . The bodies of participation or consultation must faithfully fulfill the function assigned to them, in accordance with the norm of universal law and their own, and, each in its own way, they will be a channel for the request and participation of all members with regard to the good of the entire institute or the community.
§ 2 . When establishing and making use of these means of participation and consultation, prudent discretion must be observed, and their procedure must be in accordance with the character and purpose of the institute.

634
634. § 1 . The institutes, provinces and houses, as legal entities that are in their own right, have the capacity to acquire, possess, manage and dispose of temporal goods, unless this capacity is excluded or limited by the constitutions.
§ 2 . They must avoid, however, any appearance of luxury, immoderate profit and accumulation of goods.

635
635. § 1 . The temporal goods of religious institutes, being ecclesiastical goods, are governed by the prescriptions of Book V Of the Temporal Goods of the Church, unless otherwise expressly established.
§ 2 . However, each institute must establish appropriate rules on the use and administration of assets, with which it promotes, defends and manifests the poverty that is its own.

636
636. § 1 . In each institute, and also in each province governed by a major Superior, there is a treasurer distinct from the major Superior and designated in accordance with proper law, who manages the administration of goods under the direction of the respective Superior. Also in local communities, as far as possible, a treasurer separate from the local Superior should be established.
§ 2 . In the time and manner determined by law, treasurers and other administrators must render accounts of their administration to the competent authority.

637
637. The autonomous monasteries discussed in the c

638
638. § 1 . Within the limits of universal law, it is up to proper law to determine which acts go beyond the purpose and method of ordinary administration, as well as to establish the necessary requirements to validly carry out an act of extraordinary administration.
§ 2 . In addition to the Superiors, those charged with this function by right carry out expenses and legal acts of ordinary administration, within the limits of their position.
§ 3 . For the validity of a sale or any operation in which the financial condition of a legal entity may suffer damage, the license of the competent Superior given in writing, with the consent of its council, is required. But if it is an operation in which the sum determined by the Holy See for each region is exceeded, or of goods donated to the Church, due to a vote, or of objects of great price due to their artistic or historical value, the license of the Holy See itself is also required.
§ 4 . The autonomous monasteries, of which c. 615, and institutes of diocesan law also need to obtain the consent of the local Ordinary, granted in writing.
638. and 639, and also of proper law.
§ 2 . According to the rule of proper law, members are also capable of acquiring, possessing, managing and disposing of temporal goods, but everything they acquire by reason of it belongs to society.
638. § 3, when the value of the assets whose disposal is proposed is within the minimum and maximum limits set by each Episcopal Conference for its respective region, the competent authority is determined by the statutes themselves, if they are legal entities not subject to the diocesan Bishop; but, if they are subject to him, the diocesan Bishop is competent, with the consent of the council of economic affairs and the college of consultants as well as that of the interested parties. The diocesan Bishop also needs their consent to alienate property of the diocese.
§ 2 . If, however, it concerns property whose value is greater than the maximum amount, or votive offerings donated to the Church, or precious property for artistic or historical reasons, the license of the Holy See is also required for the validity of the alienation.
§ 3 . If the thing to be sold is divisible, when requesting the license for the sale, the parts previously sold must be specified; Otherwise, the license is invalid.
§ 4 . Those who must intervene in the disposal of assets with their advice or consent must not give them if they have not previously been exactly informed, both of the economic situation of the legal entity whose assets are to be sold, and of the sales carried out previously.

639
639. § 1 . If a legal entity incurs debts and obligations, even if it does so with permission from Superiors, it must be responsible for them.
§ 2 . If a member contracts them on his own property with the permission of the Superior, he is personally responsible; but if he carried out a business of the institute with a mandate from the Superior, the institute must respond.
§ 3 . If a religious contracts them without any license from the Superiors, he is personally responsible, and not the legal entity.
§ 4 . But let it be clear that action can always be brought against the person who increased his assets due to the contract made.
§ 5 . Religious Superiors should take care not to allow debts to be contracted, unless it is certain that with the usual income it will be possible to pay the interest and return the capital by legitimate amortization within a period of time that is not too long.

640
640. Taking into account the circumstances of the different places, the institutes should strive to bear witness, in some collective way, to charity and poverty and, to the extent possible, they should allocate some of their own assets to the needs of the Church and to the sustenance of the poor.

641
641. The right to admit candidates to the novitiate belongs to the major Superiors, in accordance with the norm of proper law.

642
642. With vigilant care, the Superiors will admit only those who, in addition to the necessary age, have health, adequate character and sufficient qualities of maturity to embrace the life of the institute; These qualities of health, character and maturity must be verified, if necessary, with the collaboration of experts, without prejudice to the provisions of c. 220.

643
643. § 1 . He is invalidly admitted to the novitiate:
1 who has not yet reached the age of seventeen;
2 a spouse, during the marriage;
3 who is at that moment bound by a sacred bond with some institute of consecrated life or is incorporated into a society of apostolic life, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 684;
4 who enters the institute induced by violence, serious fear or fraud, or whoever the Superior admits induced in the same way;
5 who has hidden his incorporation into an institute of consecrated life or a society of apostolic life.
§ 2 . The proper law may also add other impediments to the validity of the admission, or impose other conditions.

644
644. Superiors do not admit secular clerics as novices without consulting their own Ordinary, nor those who have incurred debts that they cannot pay.

645
645. § 1 . Before admission to the novitiate, candidates must present a certificate of baptism and confirmation, as well as their free status.
§ 2 . If it is a question of receiving clerics or those who have been admitted to another institute of consecrated life, to a society of apostolic life or to a seminary, a report is also required, respectively, from the local Ordinary or from the Major Superior of the institute or society, or from the rector of the seminary.
§ 3 . The law itself may require other reports on the suitability of the candidates and their lack of impediments.
§ 4 . The Superiors can also request, if they deem necessary, other information, even in secret.

646
646. The purpose of the novitiate, with which life in an institute begins, is for the novices to better know the divine vocation, particularly that of the institute, to try its way of life, to conform their mind and heart to its spirit, and so that their intention and suitability can be verified.

647
647. § 1 . The erection, transfer and suppression of the novitiate house must be carried out by written decree of the Superior General of the institute, with the consent of its council.
§ 2 . For the novitiate to be valid, it must take place in a house duly designated for this purpose. In particular cases and as an exception, by grant of the Superior General with the consent of his council, a candidate can do the novitiate in another house of the institute, under the direction of an experienced religious, who acts as master of novices.
§ 3 . The Major Superior may allow the group of novices to live, during certain periods of time, in another house of the institute designated by him.
647. § 3 .
§ 2 . To complete the formation of novices, in addition to the time established in the § 1, the constitutions may prescribe one or more periods of exercise of the apostolate outside the novitiate community.
§ 3 . The novitiate should not last more than two years.
647. § 3 and 648 § 2, absence for more than three months, continuous or interrupted, from the novitiate house, makes it invalid. Absences exceeding fifteen days must be made up.
§ 2 . With the permission of the competent Major Superior, the first profession may be anticipated, but not by more than fifteen days.

648
648. § 1 . For its validity, the novitiate must last twelve months spent in the same community of the novitiate, subject to what is prescribed by the c
648. § 1, should be used properly in the task of formation, and therefore novices should not engage in studies or work that do not directly contribute to this formation.

650
650. § 1 . The purpose of the novitiate requires that novices be trained under the direction of a master, according to the training plan that must be determined by law.
§ 2 . The regime of novices is reserved exclusively to the master, under the authority of the major Superiors.

651
651. §1 . The master of novices must be a professed member of the institute with perpetual vows and legitimately appointed.
§ 2 . If necessary, the master can be given assistants who depend on him regarding the direction of the novitiate and the formation plan.
§ 3 . Carefully prepared members must be assigned to attend to the formation of novices, who, without being impeded by other work, can fulfill their functions fruitfully and stably.

652
652. § 1 . It is up to the master and his assistants to discern and verify the vocation of the novices, and to gradually form them so that they live the life of perfection typical of the institute.
§ 2 . The novices should be encouraged to live human and Christian virtues; They must be led on a path of greater perfection through prayer and self-denial; Instruct them in the contemplation of the mystery of salvation and in the reading and meditation of the sacred Scriptures; They will be prepared to celebrate the worship of God in the sacred liturgy; They will be formed to lead a life consecrated to God and men in Christ through evangelical counsels; They will be instructed about the character, spirit, purpose, discipline, history and life of the institute; and they will be imbued with love for the Church and its sacred Pastors.
§ 3 . The novices, aware of their own responsibility, must actively collaborate with the master, so that they respond faithfully to the grace of the divine vocation.
§ 4 . The members of the institute must collaborate on their part in the formation of the novices, with the example of their life and with prayer.
§ 5 . The novitiate time indicated in c.

653
653. § 1 . A novice can freely leave the institute; his competent authority may dismiss him.
§ 2 . At the end of the novitiate, the novice must be admitted to temporary profession, if he is considered suitable; Otherwise, he must be fired; If there remains any doubt about his suitability, the Major Superior may extend the probationary period in accordance with proper law, but not for more than six months.

654
654. Through religious profession, members embrace with a public vote, to observe them, the three evangelical councils, consecrate themselves to God for the ministry of the Church and join the institute with the rights and duties determined by law.

655
655. Temporary profession must be made for the time established in the proper law, not less than a three-year period nor more than a six-year period.
655. and 657.
§ 2 The Superior of an autonomous monastery has this same power, with the consent of his council.

656
656. For the validity of temporary profession it is required that:
1 the person who is going to do it has reached at least eighteen years of age;
2 has validly completed the novitiate;
3 has been freely admitted by the competent Superior with the vote of his council in accordance with the norm of law;
4 the profession is express and has been issued without violence, serious fear or fraud;
5 the profession is received by the legitimate Superior, personally or through another.

657
657. § 1 . Once the time for which the profession was made has expired, the religious who spontaneously requests it and is considered suitable must be admitted to the renewal of profession or to perpetual profession; Otherwise, you will leave the institute.
§ 2 . But if it seems appropriate, the competent Superior may extend the time of temporary profession in accordance with proper law, so that the time during which a member remains bound by temporary vows does not exceed nine years.
§ 3 . Perpetual profession may be anticipated with just cause, but not by more than one quarter.
657. § 3 .

658
658. In addition to the conditions indicated in c. 656, nos. 3, 4 and 5 and the others added by proper law, for the validity of perpetual profession, the following is required:
1 have reached at least twenty-one years of age;
2 prior temporary profession for at least three years, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c.

659
659. § 1 . After the first profession, the formation of all members must continue in each institute, so that they may live more fully the life of the institute and better fulfill their mission.
§ 2 . Therefore, proper law must determine the plan of this formation and its duration, taking into account the needs of the Church and the circumstances of men and times, as required by the purpose and character of the institute.
§ 3 . The training of members preparing to receive sacred orders is governed by the institute's own curriculum and by universal law.

660
660. § 1 . The formation must be systematic, adapted to the capacity of the members, spiritual and apostolic, doctrinal and at the same time practical, and also, if appropriate, with the obtaining of the relevant titles, both ecclesiastical and civil.
§ 2 . During the time dedicated to this training, members should not be entrusted with functions and jobs that impede it.

661
661. Religious will diligently continue their spiritual, doctrinal and practical formation throughout their lives; The Superiors must provide them with the means and time for this.

662
662. Religious must have as the supreme rule of life the following of Christ as proposed in the Gospel and expressed in the constitutions of their own institute.

663
663. § 1 . The contemplation of divine things and assiduous union with God in prayer must be the first and principal duty of all religious.
§ 2 . To the extent possible, members will participate each day in the Eucharistic Sacrifice, receive the most holy Body of Christ, and worship the Lord present in the Sacrament.
§ 3 . They will dedicate time to the reading of the sacred Scripture and to mental prayer, they will celebrate the liturgy of the hours with dignity according to the prescriptions of proper law, the obligation of which c.

664
664. Let religious insist on the conversion of their soul to God, examine their conscience daily and frequently approach the sacrament of penance.

665
665. § 1 . The religious must reside in their own religious house, living in common and not being absent from it without permission from the Superior. In the case of a prolonged absence, the Major Superior, with the consent of his council and with just cause, may allow a member to live outside a house of the institute, but not for more than one year, except for reasons of illness, studies or to exercise the apostolate on behalf of the institute.
§ 2 . Let the Superiors diligently look for the member of the institute who is illegitimately absent from the religious house with the intention of freeing himself from his obedience, and help him to return and persevere in his vocation.
665. § 2, for more than one semester; and other causes of similar gravity, which may be determined by the institute's own law.
§ 2 . For the expulsion of a member with temporary votes, other less serious causes determined in the proper law are also sufficient.

666
666. The necessary discretion must be observed in the use of social media, and what may be harmful to one's vocation or dangerous to the chastity of a consecrated person will be avoided.

667
667. § 1 . In all houses, the cloister will be observed, adapted to the character and mission of the institute, as determined by its own law, and a part of the religious house must always be reserved exclusively for the members.
§ 2 . A stricter discipline of the cloister must be observed in monasteries of contemplative life.
§ 3 . The monasteries of nuns with an entirely contemplative life must observe the papal cloister, that is, according to the norms given by the Apostolic See. The other monasteries of nuns will experience the closure adapted to their own character and determined in the constitutions.
§ 4 . The diocesan Bishop has the power to enter with just cause into the enclosure of the monasteries of nuns that are in his diocese, and to allow, with serious cause, and the consent of the Abbess, that other people be admitted to the enclosure, and that the nuns leave it outside of it for the time truly necessary.

668
668. § 1 . Before the first profession, the members will transfer the administration of their property to whomever they wish, and, if the constitutions do not prescribe otherwise, they will freely dispose of its use and usufruct. And before, at least, perpetual profession, they will make a will that is also valid according to civil law.
§ 2 . They need a license from the competent Superior, in accordance with the norm of proper law, to modify these provisions with just cause, and to carry out any act regarding temporal goods.
§ 3 . Everything that a religious earns through his own work or because of the institute, he acquires for the institute. What you receive in any way as a pension, subsidy or insurance, you acquire for the institute, unless your own law establishes otherwise.
§ 4 . Whoever, due to the nature of the institute, must completely renounce his assets, must make this renunciation before perpetual profession so that it has effects from the day of profession, and is also valid, if possible, in civil law. The same will be done by the professed perpetual vows who, in accordance with his own law, wishes to renounce all or part of his property, with the permission of the Superior General.
§ 5 . The professed person who, due to the nature of the institute, has renounced all his assets, loses the ability to acquire and possess, so his acts contrary to the vow of poverty are null and void. What you acquire after the resignation will belong to the institute in accordance with the rule of its own law.

669
669. § 1 . Religious must wear the habit of their institute, made in accordance with the norm of proper law, as a sign of their consecration and testimony of poverty.
§ 2 . The clerical religious of an institute who do not have their own habit will wear clerical dress, in accordance with the norm of c. 284.

670
670. The institute must provide its members with all the necessary means, according to the constitutions, to achieve the goal of their vocation.

672
672. Religious are bound by the prescriptions of cc. 277, 285, 286,

673
673. The apostolate of all religious consists primarily of the witness of their consecrated life, which they must promote with prayer and penance.

674
674. Institutes of exclusively contemplative life always have a relevant part in the mystical Body of Christ, since they offer God an excellent sacrifice of praise, they enrich the people of God with abundant fruits of holiness, they move them with their example and they increase them with their hidden apostolic fruitfulness. Therefore, even when the need for an apostolate of action is urgent, the members of these institutes cannot be called to collaborate in the different pastoral ministries.

675
675. § 1 . In institutes that are dedicated to works of apostolate, apostolic activity is part of their very nature. Therefore, the entire life of the members must be filled with the apostolic spirit and all apostolic action must be informed by the religious spirit.
§ 2 . Apostolic activity must always spring from intimate union with God, and at the same time confirm and promote it.
§ 3 . Apostolic activity, which is carried out in the name of the Church and by its mandate, must be exercised in communion with it.

676
676. Lay institutes, both for men and women, participate in the pastoral function of the Church and provide very diverse services to men through spiritual and corporal works of mercy; They must, therefore, remain faithfully in the grace of their vocation.

677
677. § 1 . The Superiors and other members faithfully maintain the mission and works of their institute; prudently accommodate them, attending to the needs of time and place, also using new and appropriate means.
§ 2 . If you have associations of faithful united with you, help them with special diligence so that they are informed by the genuine spirit of your family.

678
678. § 1 . Religious are subject to the power of the Bishops, whom they must follow with pious submission and respect, in what concerns the care of souls, the public exercise of divine worship and other works of apostolate.
§ 2 . In the exercise of the external apostolate, religious also depend on their own Superiors and must remain faithful to the discipline of their institute; The Bishops will not fail to urge this obligation when appropriate.
§ 3 . It is necessary that the diocesan Bishops and the religious Superiors exchange opinions when directing the apostolate works of the religious.
678. §§ 2 and 3.
§ 2 . In these cases, a written agreement must be agreed between the diocesan Bishop and the competent Superior of the institute, in which, among other things, what refers to the work to be carried out, the members who will dedicate themselves to it and the economic regime are expressly and well defined.

679
679. For a very serious reason, the diocesan Bishop may prohibit the residence in his own diocese of a member of a religious institute, if, having been warned, his Major Superior had neglected to take measures; However, the matter must be placed immediately in the hands of the Holy See.

680
680. Orderly cooperation is encouraged between the different institutes, as well as between them and the secular clergy, and also, under the direction of the diocesan Bishop, the coordination of all apostolic works and activities, respecting the character, purpose and founding laws of each institute.

681
681. § 1 . The activities entrusted to religious by the diocesan Bishop remain under the authority and direction of the latter, without prejudice to the right of the religious Superiors, in accordance with the norm of the c

682
682. § 1, the provision of the office of parish priest is the responsibility of the diocesan Bishop, through free collation, unless someone enjoys the right of presentation or election.
682. § 1 .
682. § 2 .
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio De concordia inter Codices, dated May 31, 2016)]:
§ 2 . The confirmation will also be noted in the baptized book, as well as what refers to the canonical status of the faithful by reason of marriage, leaving aside what is prescribed in c. 1133, due to adoption, reception of sacred orders, perpetual profession issued in a religious institute and change of rite; and these notes must always be recorded in the baptism certificate.
682. § 1 . When it comes to conferring an ecclesiastical office on a religious in a diocese, he is appointed by the diocesan Bishop, after presentation or at least assent of the competent Superior.
§ 2 . That religious may be removed from his office at the discretion of both the authority that has entrusted him with it, warning the religious Superior, and the Superior, warning the person who entrusted the office, without requiring the consent of the other.

683
683. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop may visit, personally or through another, during the pastoral visit and also in case of need, the churches and oratories to which the faithful have regular access, as well as the schools and other works of religion or charity, both spiritual and temporal, entrusted to religious; but not schools open exclusively to the institute's own students.
§ 2 . If you discover any abuse, after having notified the religious Superior without result, you can personally provide it with your own authority.

684
684. § 1 . A member of perpetual vows cannot transfer from his own to another religious institute, except by concession of the Superior Generals of both institutes, and with the consent of their respective councils.
§ 2 . That member, after a trial that must last at least three years, can be admitted to perpetual profession in the new institute. But, if he refuses to make that profession or is not admitted to it by the competent Superiors, he must return to the first institute, unless he has obtained an indult of secularization.
§ 3 . For a religious to be able to move from an autonomous monastery to another of the same institute, federation or confederation, the consent of the major Superiors of the two monasteries and that of the chapter of the monastery that hosts him is required and sufficient, without prejudice to the other requirements established by proper law; no new profession is required.
§ 4 . The proper law must determine the duration and manner of the test that must precede the profession of the member in the new institute.
§ 5 . For the transition to a secular institute or a society of apostolic life or from these to a religious institute, a license is required from the Holy See, whose mandates must be subject to.
684. §§ 1, 2, 4 and 685; But to move to a religious institute or a society of apostolic life, or from them to a secular institute, a license from the Holy See is required, whose mandates must be adhered to.
__________________________
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Letter 
apostolic in the form of Motu proprio 

Communis vita with which some norms of the 
Code of Canon Law, March 19, 2019)]:

685
685. § 1 . Until his profession in the new institute, the rights and obligations that a member had in the first are suspended, the vows remaining in force; However, from the moment the test begins, you are obliged to observe the law of the new institute.
§ 2 . By profession in the new institute, the member joins it, and the previous votes, rights and obligations cease.

686
686. § 1 . n The Superior General, with the consent of his council, may grant an indult of exclaustration to a perpetually professed person for serious reasons, but not for more than five years, and having previously obtained, in the case of a cleric, the consent of the Ordinary of the place in which he must reside. Extending this pardon or granting it for more than a five-year period is reserved to the Holy See or, when it is an institute of diocesan law, to the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . It is the exclusive responsibility of the Apostolic See to grant indult of exclaustration to nuns.
§ 3 . At the request of the Superior General, with the consent of his council, for serious reasons and observing equity and charity, exclaustration may be imposed by the Holy See on a member of an institute of pontifical law, and by the diocesan Bishop on a member of an institute of diocesan law.
686. § 1 . The Superior General, with the consent of his council, may grant for grave reasons an indult of exclaustration to a perpetually professed person, but not for more than one triennium, and having previously obtained, in the case of a cleric, the consent of the Ordinary of the place in which he must reside. Extending this indult or granting it for more than a three-year period is reserved to the Holy See or, when it is an institute of diocesan law, to the diocesan Bishop.

687
687. The exclaustrated member is free from obligations that are not compatible with his new condition of life, and remains under the dependence and care of his Superiors and also of the local Ordinary, especially if he is a clergyman. You may wear the habit of the institute, unless otherwise stated in the pardon. However, it lacks a voice, both active and passive.

688
688. § 1 . Whoever wants to leave an institute after the time of profession has elapsed can leave it.
§ 2 . n Whoever, during temporary profession, requests, for serious reasons, to leave the institute, may obtain from the Superior General, with the consent of his council, the pardon to leave; for a sui iuris monastery, of which c. 615, that pardon, to be valid, must be confirmed by the Bishop of the house to which the member is assigned.
688. § 2 . Whoever, during temporary profession, asks, with serious cause, to leave the institute, may obtain from the Superior General, with the consent of his council, an indult to leave if it is an institute of pontifical right; in the institutes of diocesan law and in the monasteries mentioned in c. 615, that pardon, to be valid, must be confirmed by the Bishop of the house to which the member is assigned.

689
689. § 1 . Once the time of the temporary profession of a member has expired, there being just causes, the competent Major Superior, after hearing his advice, may exclude him from subsequent profession.
§ 2 . The physical or mental illness, even if it has been contracted after profession, if it is of such a nature that in the opinion of the experts makes the member referred to in the § 1 unfit to live in the institute, constitutes cause for not admitting him to renew the profession or to issue perpetual profession, unless the disease had been contracted due to the negligence of the institute or due to the work carried out in it.
§ 3 . But if the religious, during temporary vows, falls into amencia, even if he is not capable of making a new profession, he cannot nevertheless be dismissed from the institute.

690
690. § 1 . Whoever has legitimately left the institute after completing the novitiate or even after profession, may be readmitted by the Superior General with the consent of his council, without the obligation to repeat the novitiate; It is up to the same Superior to determine the appropriate test prior to temporary profession and the duration of vows before perpetual profession, in accordance with the norm of the ccs.

691
691. § 1 . A professed person of perpetual vows should not ask for a pardon for leaving the institute if it is not for very serious reasons considered in the presence of God; and he will submit his request to the Superior General of the institute, who, together with his own opinion and that of his council, will transmit it to the competent authority.
§ 2 . In the institutes of pontifical right, this indult is reserved to the Apostolic See; In those of diocesan law, it can also be granted by the Bishop of the diocese of that house to which the religious is assigned.

692
692. The pardon of departure legitimately granted and notified to the member, carries with it by right the dispensation from the vows and from all the obligations arising from the profession, unless, in the act of notification, the pardon was rejected by the member himself.

693
693. If the member is a clergyman, the indult is not granted before he has found a Bishop who will incardin him in his diocese or, at least, admit him on trial there. If he is admitted on probation, he remains, after five years, incardinated by law in the diocese, unless the Bishop rejects him.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio of February 11, 2022)]:

694
694. n 
§1 . The person must be considered expelled ipso facto from an institute. 
member who:

1) has notoriously abandoned the Catholic faith;

2) has entered into marriage or has attempted it, even if it is only 
civil manner.

3) has been illegitimately absent from the religious house, according to the 
Can. 665 § 2, for twelve uninterrupted months, taking into account that 
The religious is untraceable.

§2 . In these cases, once the evidence has been collected, the Major Superior 
with its council must issue without delay a declaration of the 
fact, so that the expulsion is legally recorded.

§3 . In the case provided for by § 1 n. 3, said declaration so that 
legally established it must be confirmed by the Holy See; for the 
institutes of diocesan law, confirmation corresponds to the 
Bishop of the main see.
694. § 1 . A member who:
1 has notoriously abandoned the Catholic faith;
2 has entered into marriage or attempts it, even if only in a civil manner.
§ 2 . In these cases, once the evidence has been collected, the Major Superior with his council must issue without delay a declaration of the fact, so that the expulsion is legally recorded.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Letter 
apostolic in the form of "Motu Proprio" 

Recognitum Librum VI with which the Can. 695 §1 is modified, 
of the Code of Canon Law, April 26, 2022)]:
694. and 695; The constitutions will also determine other causes of expulsion, as long as they are proportionally serious, external, imputable and legally proven, proceeding in accordance with the provisions of the ccs. 697-700. The provisions of c. 701.

695
695. - n 
§1 . Sodalis dimitti debent ob delicta de quibus in cann. 1395, 1397 
et 1398 , nisi in delictis, de quibus in cann. 1395 §§2 -3, et 1398 
§1 , Superior maior censeat resignationem non esse omnino necessariam 
et emendationi sodalis atque restitutioni iustitiae et reparationi 
scandali satis alio moda consuli posse. [Apostolic letter in 
“Motu Proprio” form 

Recognitum Librum VI with which the Can. 695 §1 is modified, 
of the Code of Canon Law, April 26, 2022]
§ 2 . In these cases, the Major Superior, after collecting evidence about the facts and their imputability, will present the accusation and the evidence to the member, giving him the opportunity to defend himself. All the minutes signed by the Major Superior and the notary, as well as the written responses of the member and signed by him, will be sent to the Superior General.
695. and 696, the right of the member to address the Superior General and to present his defense directly to him remains firm.
695. § 1 . A member who commits one of the crimes referred to in ccs must be expelled. 1397,

696
696. § 1 . A member may also be expelled for other reasons, as long as they are serious, external, imputable and legally proven, such as: habitual neglect of the obligations of consecrated life; the repeated violations of sacred bonds; the persistent disobedience to the legitimate mandates of the Superiors in serious matters; the serious scandal caused by his culpable conduct; the persistent defense or dissemination of doctrines condemned by the teachings of the Church; public adherence to ideologies contaminated by materialism or atheism; the illegitimate absence referred to in the c

697
697. In the cases discussed in c. 696, if the Major Superior, after hearing his advice, considers that the expulsion process should begin:
1 will gather or complete the evidence;
2 will reprimand the member in writing or before two witnesses, with an explicit warning that he will be expelled if he does not correct himself, clearly indicating the cause and giving him full freedom to defend himself; If the warning is ineffective, after at least fifteen days, a second warning will be issued;
3 If this admonition also proves useless and the Major Superior with his council considers that the incorrigibility and insufficiency of the member's defense is sufficiently established, fifteen days after the last admonition has passed without effect, he will send to the Superior General all the minutes signed by himself and by the notary, as well as the member's responses also signed by the notary.

698
698. In all the cases discussed in the cc

699
699. § 1 . The Superior General, with his council, which for the validity of the act will consist of at least four members, must proceed collegially to diligently weigh the evidence, reasons and defenses; and, if this is decided by secret vote, the decree of expulsion will be issued, which, for its validity, must contain the legal and factual reasons, at least summarily.
§ 2 . n In the autonomous monasteries mentioned in c. 615, it is up to the Major Superior to decide on expulsion, with the consent of his council. 
[Rescriptum 
former Audientia Sanctissimi (March 25, 2026): The Sumo 
Pontiff Leo XIV, has granted the Dicastery for 
Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life 
power to authorize the competent diocesan bishop to issue the 
resignation decree referred to in Can. 699 § 2 of the Code of 
Canon Law, in the event that the professed person who must be resigned 
be the major superior of the monastery.]
699. § 2 . In the autonomous monasteries discussed in c. 615, it is up to the diocesan Bishop to decide on the expulsion, to whom the Superior must present the minutes approved by his council.

700
700. n 
Decretum resignationis in sodalem professum latum vim habet simul ac ei, cuius interest, notificatur. Decretum vero, ut valeat, indicare debent ius, quo dimissus gaudet, recurrendi, absque petitione de qua in Can. 1734 , § 1 , intra triginta dies a recepta notificatione ad auctoritatem competentm. Recursus effectum habet suspensivum.
[(cf. Letter 
apostolic in the form of "Motu Proprio" with which the 
deadlines for filing an appeal by an expelled member of 
an institute of consecrated life, April 2, 2023)]
700. The decree of expulsion against a professed person is valid from the moment it is notified to the interested party. However, for the decree to be valid, it must indicate the right of the expelled person to appeal, within ten days of receiving the notification, to the competent authority. The appeal has suspensive effect.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Competentias quasdam decernere of February 11, 2022)]:
700. The decree of expulsion is not valid until it is confirmed by the Holy See, to which said decree must be sent along with the minutes; If it is an institute of diocesan law, confirmation corresponds to the Bishop of the diocese where the house to which the religious is attached is located. However, for the decree to be valid, it must indicate the right of the expelled person to appeal, within ten days of receiving the notification, to the competent authority. The appeal has suspensive effect.

701
701. By legitimate expulsion, the votes cease ipso facto, as well as the rights and obligations arising from the profession. But if the member is a clergyman, he cannot exercise sacred orders until he finds a Bishop who, after a suitable test, receives him into his diocese in accordance with the norm of c. 693, or at least allows him to exercise sacred orders.

702
702. § 1 . Those who legitimately leave a religious institute or have been expelled from it do not have the right to demand anything for any type of service provided therein.
§ 2 . However, the institute must observe equity and evangelical charity with the member who separates from it.

703
703. In case of serious external scandal or very serious damage that threatens the institute, a member can be immediately expelled from the religious house by the major Superior or, if there is danger in delay, by the local Superior with the consent of his council. If necessary, the Major Superior will ensure that the expulsion process is conducted in accordance with the rule of law, or will refer the matter to the Apostolic See.

704
704. In the report that must be sent to the Apostolic See in accordance with c. 592
§ 1, the members who have separated from the institute for any reason must be indicated.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Letter 
apostolic in the form of Motu proprio 

Communis vita with which some norms of the 
Code of Canon Law, March 19, 2019)]:

705
705. The religious elevated to the episcopate remains a member of his institute, but, by the vow of obedience, he is subject exclusively to the Roman Pontiff, and he is not bound by those duties that he himself prudently judges to be incompatible with his condition.

706
706. The same religious:
1 if due to profession he lost control of the assets, he has the use, usufruct and administration of the assets he subsequently acquires; but, both the diocesan Bishop and those others referred to in c.

707
707. § 1 . The religious retired as a Bishop can also choose his residence outside of a house of his institute, unless the Apostolic See establishes otherwise.
§ 2 . As regards its convenient and dignified support, if it had served a diocese, the provisions of c.

708
708. Major Superiors can usefully associate in conferences or councils, so that, in unity of effort, they may work to more fully achieve the goal of each institute, safeguarding their autonomy, character and spirit, either to deal with common issues or to establish appropriate coordination and cooperation with the Episcopal Conferences, as well as with each of the Bishops.

709
709. The conferences of major Superiors have their own statutes approved by the Holy See, which is solely responsible for establishing them as a legal entity and under whose supreme authority they remain.

710
710. A secular institute is an institute of consecrated life in which the faithful, living in the world, aspire to the perfection of charity, and dedicate themselves to seeking the sanctification of the world, especially from within it.

711
711. By consecration, a member of a secular institute does not modify his or her own canonical, clerical or lay status in the people of God, observing the prescriptions of law relating to institutes of consecrated life.

712
712. Without prejudice to the prescriptions of cc. 598-601, the constitutions must establish the sacred bonds with which the evangelical councils are embraced in the institute, and will determine the obligations that arise from these bonds, preserving however in the way of living the secularity proper to the institute.

713
713. § 1 . The members of these institutes manifest and exercise their own consecration in apostolic activity and, like leaven, they strive to impregnate all things with the evangelical spirit, for the strength and increase of the Body of Christ.
§ 2 . The lay members participate in the evangelizing function of the Church in the world and taking advantage of the world either with the testimony of Christian life and fidelity to their consecration, or with the collaboration they provide to order temporal affairs according to God and inform the world with the force of the Gospel. And they also offer their own cooperation in the service of the ecclesial community, in accordance with their secular way of life.
§ 3 . The clergy members, through the testimony of consecrated life, help above all their brothers in the presbytery with peculiar apostolic charity, and carry out the sanctification of the world among the people of God through their sacred ministry.

714
714. The members must live in the ordinary circumstances of the world, either alone, or with their own family, or in groups of fraternal life, in accordance with the constitutions.

715
715. § 1 . The clerical members incardinated in the diocese depend on the diocesan Bishop, remaining safe with regard to consecrated life in their own institute.
§ 2 . But those who join the institute in accordance with the norm of c.

716
716. § 1 . All members must actively participate in the life of the institute, according to their own law.
§ 2 . The members of the same institute must live in communion with each other, diligently safeguarding unity of spirit and genuine brotherhood.

717
717. § 1 . The constitutions must determine the very mode of regime, the time during which the Directors carry out their office and the way of appointing them.
§ 2 . No one should be appointed General Director if he or she is not permanently incorporated.
§ 3 . Those entrusted with the regime of the institute take care that the unity of spirit is observed and the active participation of the members is encouraged.

718
718. The administration of the assets of the institute, which must manifest and promote evangelical poverty, is governed by the norms of Book V, Of the temporal goods of the Church, as well as by the proper law of the institute. Likewise, the law itself must determine the obligations, especially economic, of the institute with respect to those members who work for it.

719
719. § 1 . So that the members faithfully correspond to their vocation and their apostolic action is the fruit of the same union with Christ, they must dedicate themselves intensely to prayer, read sacred Scripture appropriately, observe the annual times of retreat and perform other exercises of piety according to their own right.
§ 2 . The celebration of the Eucharist, daily as far as possible, should be the source and strength of your entire consecrated life.
§ 3 . They will freely attend the sacrament of penance, which they must receive frequently.
§ 4 . Feel free to have the necessary direction of conscience and seek appropriate advice from your own Directors, if you wish.

720
720. The right to admit to the institute, with regard to both the test and the sacred bonds, whether temporary, perpetual or definitive, corresponds to the Major Directors with their council, in accordance with the constitutions.

721
721. § 1 . He is invalidly admitted to the initial test:
1 who has not yet reached the age of majority;
2 who is linked by sacred bond to an institute of consecrated life or is incorporated into a society of apostolic life;
3 a spouse, during the marriage.
§ 2 . Constitutions may establish other impediments to admission, which even affect validity, or set conditions.
§ 3 . Furthermore, for someone to be received, they must possess the necessary maturity to properly lead the life of the institute.

722
722. § 1 . The initial test should aim for the candidates to better know their divine vocation and that of the institute, and to exercise themselves in the spirit and way of life of the institute.
§ 2 . Candidates must be properly formed to live according to the evangelical counsels and convert their entire lives into an apostolate, using those forms of evangelization that best respond to the purpose, spirit and nature of the institute.
§ 3 . The manner and time of this test prior to the acquisition for the first time of sacred bonds in the institute shall be determined in the constitutions; The duration cannot be less than one biennium.

723
723. § 1 . Once the time of the initial test has elapsed, the candidate who is considered suitable must embrace the three evangelical counsels, corroborated with a sacred bond, or leave the institute.
§ 2 . This first incorporation, not less than five years, must be temporary in accordance with the norm of the constitutions.
§ 3 . Once the time of this incorporation has expired, the member considered suitable will be admitted to incorporation, either perpetually or definitively, that is, with temporary ties that must always be renewed.
§ 4 . Regarding certain legal effects, which must be established in the constitutions, definitive incorporation is equivalent to perpetual incorporation.

724
724. § 1 . After having acquired the sacred bonds for the first time, the formation must continue permanently, according to the constitutions.
§ 2 . The members must be formed at the same time in divine and human things; and the Directors of the institute must diligently take care of the continuous spiritual formation.

725
725. Through some link determined in the constitutions, the institute can associate other faithful who aspire to evangelical perfection according to the spirit of the institute, and participate in its mission.

726
726. § 1 . After the time of temporary incorporation has elapsed, the member may freely leave the institute, or the Senior Director, after hearing his advice and with just cause, may exclude him from the renewal of the sacred bonds.
§ 2 . The temporarily incorporated member who requests it of his own will, may, with serious cause, obtain from the Director General, with the consent of his council, a pardon to leave the institute.

727
727. § 1 . The perpetually incorporated member who wishes to leave the institute, after considering the matter seriously in the presence of God, may ask the Apostolic See, through the Director General, for the necessary indult if the institute is of pontifical right; Otherwise, also to the diocesan Bishop, as determined in the constitutions.
§ 2 . If it is a cleric incardinated to the institute, what is prescribed in c. 693.

728
728. Once the pardon to leave the institute is legitimately granted, all ties cease, as well as the rights and obligations arising from incorporation.

729
729. n The expulsion of a member from the institute is carried out in accordance with 
what is established in cann. 694 § 1, 1 and 2 and 695; the constitutions 
They will also determine other causes of expulsion, as long as they are 
proportionally serious, external, imputable and legally 
verified, proceeding in accordance with the provisions of the cann. 
697-700. The provisions of Can. 701 apply to expulsion.
729. The expulsion of a member of the institute is carried out in accordance with the provisions of the cc

730
730. For the transition of a member from a secular institute to another secular institute, the prescriptions of the ccs must be observed.

731
731. § 1 . Institutes of consecrated life are similar to societies of apostolic life, whose members, without religious vows, seek the apostolic goal proper to the society and, leading fraternal life in common, according to their own way of life, aspire to the perfection of charity through the observance of the constitutions.
§ 2 . Among these there are societies whose members embrace evangelical counsels through a bond determined by the constitutions.
731. § 2, ccs also apply. 598-602.

732
732. The provisions of cc. 578-597 and 606, however, leaving aside the nature of each society; but to the companies mentioned in the c

733
733. § 1 . The competent authority of the society erects the house and constitutes the local community with the prior consent, given in writing, of the diocesan Bishop, who must also be consulted for its suppression.
§ 2 . The consent to erect a house entails the right to have at least an oratory, in which the Most Holy Eucharist is celebrated and reserved.

734
734. The government of society is determined in the constitutions, and ccs will be observed. 617-633, respecting the nature of each society.

735
735. § 1 . The admission of members, their testing, incorporation and training are determined by the law of each society.
§ 2 . Regarding admission into a company, the conditions established in ccs must be observed. 642-645.
§ 3 . The proper law must determine the mode of testing and training adapted to the purpose and character of the society, especially doctrinal, spiritual and apostolic, so that the members, in accordance with their divine vocation, are adequately prepared for the mission and life of the society.

736
736. § 1 . In clerical societies, the clerics are incorporated into the same society, unless the constitutions provide otherwise.
§ 2 . Regarding the curriculum and the reception of orders, the norms prescribed for secular clergy must be observed, leaving aside what is established by § 1.

737
737. On the part of the members, incorporation carries with it the obligations and rights determined by the constitutions; and, on the part of society, the request to guide its members towards the end of their own vocation, in accordance with the constitutions.

738
738. § 1 . All members are subject to their own Moderators, in accordance with the norm of the constitutions, with regard to the internal life and discipline of the society.
§ 2 . They are also subject to the diocesan Bishop with regard to public worship, the care of souls and other works of apostolate, taking into account the ccs. 679-683.
§ 3 . The relations of a member incardinated in a diocese with its own Bishop are determined by the constitutions or by particular agreements.

739
739. In addition to the obligations that correspond to them according to the constitutions, the members have the common duties of clerics, unless, due to the very nature of the thing or the context, otherwise is established.

740
740. The members must live in the house or in the legitimately constituted community, and lead a common life, in accordance with their own law, by which absences from the house or the community are also governed.

741
741. § 1 . The societies and, if the constitutions do not determine otherwise, their constituencies and houses, are legal persons and, as such, have the capacity to acquire, possess, manage and dispose of temporal goods, in accordance with the prescriptions of Book V, Of the temporal goods of the Church, of ccs. 636,

742
742. The departure and expulsion of a member not yet definitively incorporated is governed by the constitutions of each society.

743
743. Without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 693, the pardon to leave the society, with the cessation of the rights and obligations arising from the incorporation, may be granted to a member permanently incorporated by the Supreme Moderator with the consent of his council, unless according to the constitutions it is reserved to the Holy See.

744
744. § 1 . It is also reserved to the Supreme Moderator, with the consent of his council, to grant permission for a definitively incorporated member to move to another society of apostolic life, while the rights and obligations in the society itself remain suspended, but without prejudice to the right to return to it before definitive incorporation into the new society.
§ 2 . For the transition from an institute of consecrated life to a society of apostolic life, or vice versa, a license from the Holy See is required, whose mandates must be adhered to.

745
745. The Supreme Moderator, with the consent of his council, may grant a pardon to a permanently incorporated member to live outside the society, but not for more than three years, leaving in suspension the rights and obligations not compatible with his new condition; but it remains, however, under the care of the Moderators. If it is a cleric, the consent of the Ordinary of the place where he must reside is also required, under whose care and dependence he also remains.

746
746. For the expulsion of a permanently incorporated member, ccs. 694-704.

747
747. § 1 . The Church, to which Christ Our Lord entrusted the deposit of faith, so that, with the assistance of the Holy Spirit, it would holyly guard the revealed truth, delve into it and announce and expound it faithfully, has the duty and the original right, independent of any human power, to preach the Gospel to all people, even using its own means of social communication.
§ 2 . It is the responsibility of the Church always and everywhere to proclaim moral principles, including those referring to the social order, as well as to give its judgment on any human affairs, to the extent that the fundamental rights of the human person or the salvation of souls require it.

748
748. § 1 . All men are obliged to seek the truth in that which refers to God and his Church and, once known, they have, by divine law, the duty and the right to embrace and observe it.
§ 2 . It is never permissible for anyone to coerce men to embrace the Catholic faith against their own conscience.

749
749. § 1 . By virtue of his office, the Supreme Pontiff enjoys infallibility in the teaching profession, when, as Supreme Pastor and Doctor of all the faithful, who is responsible for confirming his brothers in the faith, he proclaims by a definitive act the doctrine that must be upheld in matters of faith and customs.
§ 2 . The College of Bishops also has infallibility in the magisterium when the Bishops exercise such magisterium gathered in the Ecumenical Council and, as doctors and judges of faith and customs, declare for the entire Church that a doctrine on faith or customs must be held as definitive; or when dispersed throughout the world but maintaining the bond of communion among themselves and with the successor of Peter, teaching in an authentic way together with the Roman Pontiff himself the matters of faith and customs, they agree that an opinion must be held as definitive.
§ 3 . No doctrine is considered infallibly defined if it is not manifestly defined.

750
750. n § 1 . Everything that is contained in the word of God written or transmitted by tradition, that is, in the only deposit of faith entrusted to the Church, and which is also proposed as revealed by God, either by the solemn magisterium of the Church, or by its ordinary and universal magisterium, which is manifested in the common adhesion of the faithful under the guidance of the sacred magisterium, must be believed with divine and catholic faith; Therefore, everyone is obliged to avoid any contrary doctrine.
§ 2 . Likewise, each and every one of the things regarding the doctrine of faith and customs definitively proposed by the Magisterium of the Church must be firmly accepted and retained, namely, those that are necessary to holyly guard and faithfully expose the very deposit of faith; Therefore, he opposes the doctrine of the Catholic Church who rejects said propositions that must be retained definitively.
750. Everything that is contained in the word of God written or transmitted by tradition, that is, in the only deposit of faith entrusted to the Church, and which is also proposed as revealed by God, either by the solemn magisterium of the Church, or by its ordinary and universal magisterium, which is manifested in the common adhesion of the faithful under the guidance of the sacred magisterium, must be believed with divine and catholic faith; Therefore, everyone is obliged to avoid any contrary doctrine.

751
751. The persistent denial, after receiving baptism, of a truth that must be believed with divine and Catholic faith, or the persistent doubt about it, is called heresy; apostasy is the total rejection of the Christian faith; schism, the rejection of subjection to the Supreme Pontiff or of communion with the members of the Church subject to him.

752
752. A religious assent of the understanding and will, without it becoming faith, must be given to the doctrine that the Supreme Pontiff or the College of Bishops, in the exercise of their authentic magisterium, teach about faith and customs, even if it is not their intention to proclaim it with a decision-making act; Therefore, the faithful take care to avoid everything that is not consistent with it.

753
753. The Bishops who are in communion with the Head and the members of the College, both individually and gathered in Episcopal Conferences or in particular councils, although they are not infallible in their teaching, are authentic doctors and teachers of the faithful entrusted to their care, and the faithful are obliged to adhere with religious assent to this authentic magisterium of their Bishops.

754
754. All the faithful are obliged to observe the constitutions and decrees promulgated by the legitimate authority of the Church to propose doctrine and reject erroneous opinions, and especially those promulgated by the Roman Pontiff or the College of Bishops.

755
755. § 1 . It is first of all the responsibility of the entire College of Bishops and the Apostolic See to promote and direct among Catholics the ecumenical movement, whose purpose is to reintegrate all Christians into unity, a unity that the Church, by the will of Christ, is obliged to promote.
§ 2 . It is also the responsibility of the Bishops and, in accordance with the rule of law, of the Episcopal Conferences, to promote the same unity and, according to the need or convenience of the moment, to establish practical norms, taking into account the prescriptions dictated by the supreme authority of the Church.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope John Paul II (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Ad Tuendam Fidem of May 18, 1998)]:

756
756. § 1 . Regarding the universal Church, the function of announcing the Gospel has been entrusted mainly to the Roman Pontiff and the Episcopal College.
§ 2 . In relation to the particular Church that has been entrusted to him, each Bishop exercises this function, who is certainly the moderator of the entire ministry of the word; Sometimes, however, some Bishops jointly exercise that function for several Churches, according to the rule of law.

757
757. It is proper for priests, as cooperators of the Bishops, to announce the Gospel of God; This obligation mainly affects, with respect to the people entrusted to them, the parish priests and those others to whom the care of souls is entrusted; It is also up to the deacons to serve in the ministry of the word to the people of God, in communion with the Bishop and his presbytery.

758
758. The members of institutes of consecrated life, by virtue of their own consecration to God, bear witness to the Gospel in a peculiar way, and are appropriately assumed by the Bishop as help to announce the Gospel.

759
759. By virtue of baptism and confirmation, the lay faithful are witnesses of the evangelical proclamation with their word and the example of their Christian life; They may also be called to cooperate with the Bishop and with the priests in the exercise of the ministry of the word.

760
760. The mystery of Christ must be proposed completely and faithfully in the ministry of the word, which must be founded on sacred Scripture, Tradition, the liturgy, the teaching and the life of the Church.

761
761. All available means must be used to announce Christian doctrine, especially preaching and catechesis, which always occupy a primary place; but also the teaching of the doctrine in schools, academies, conferences and meetings of all kinds, as well as its dissemination through public statements, made by the legitimate authority on the occasion of certain events through the press and other means of social communication.

762
762. Since the people of God are gathered above all by the word of the living God, which there is an absolute right to demand from the lips of priests, the sacred ministers must have a high regard for the function of preaching, among whose main duties is that of announcing the Gospel of God to all.

763
763. Bishops have the right to preach the word of God in any place, without excluding the churches and oratories of religious institutes of pontifical right, unless, in particular cases, the local Bishop expressly objects.

764
764. Keeping in mind what is prescribed in c. 765, priests and deacons have the power to preach everywhere, which they must exercise with the at least presumed consent of the rector of the church, unless this power has been restricted or taken away from them by the competent Ordinary, or unless express license is required by particular law.

765
765. To preach to religious in their churches or oratories, a license from the competent Superior is required in accordance with the constitutions.

766
766. Lay people may be admitted to preach in a church or oratory, if in certain circumstances there is a need for it, or if, in particular cases, utility advises it, according to the prescriptions of the Episcopal Conference and without prejudice to the c

767
767. § 1 .
767. § 1 . Among the forms of preaching, the homily stands out, which is part of the liturgy itself and is reserved for the priest or deacon; throughout the liturgical year, expose yourselves in it, starting from the sacred text, the mysteries of the faith and the norms of Christian life.
§ 2 . In all Sunday Masses and holy days of obligation that are celebrated with the participation of the people, there must be a homily, and it cannot be omitted without serious cause.
§ 3 . It is highly advisable that, if there is enough participation from the people, there is also a homily at the Masses celebrated during the week, especially during the season of Advent and Lent, or on the occasion of a festival or a mourning event.
§ 4 . It is up to the parish priest or rector of the church to ensure that these prescriptions are faithfully fulfilled.

768
768. § 1 . The preachers of the word of God propose to the faithful first of all what is necessary to believe and do for the glory of God and salvation of men.
§ 2 . They should also teach the faithful the doctrine proposed by the Magisterium of the Church on the dignity and freedom of the human person; about the unity, stability and duties of the family; about the obligations that correspond to men united in society; and on the way of arranging temporal affairs according to the order established by God.

769
769. Christian doctrine should be proposed in a manner adapted to the condition of the listeners and adapted to the needs of each era.

770
770. In certain periods, according to the prescriptions of the diocesan Bishop, parish priests organize those forms of preaching called spiritual exercises and sacred missions, or others adapted to the needs.

771
771. § 1 . Pastors of souls, especially Bishops and parish priests, should be anxious that the word of God be announced also to those faithful who, due to their living conditions, do not sufficiently enjoy the common and ordinary pastoral care, or who lack it completely.
§ 2 . They also ensure that the message of the Gospel reaches the non-believers who live in the territory, since the healing of souls must also reach these, as well as the faithful.

772
772. § 1 . Regarding the exercise of preaching, everyone also observes the prescriptions established by the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . To speak on topics of Christian doctrine on radio or television, the prescriptions established by the Episcopal Conference must be met.

773
773. It is a proper and serious duty, especially of the shepherds of souls, to take care of the catechesis of the Christian people, so that the faith of the faithful, through the teaching of the doctrine and the practice of the Christian life, becomes alive, explicit and operational.

774
774. § 1 . The request for catechesis, under the direction of the legitimate ecclesiastical authority, corresponds to all members of the Church to the extent of each one.
§ 2 . Before anyone else, parents are obliged to form their children in the faith and practice of the Christian life, through word and example; and those who act as parents and godparents have a similar obligation.
774. § 2 .

775
775. § 1 . Observing the prescriptions of the Apostolic See, it is up to the diocesan Bishop to dictate norms on catechesis and ensure that adequate instruments are available for it, even developing a catechism, if it seems appropriate; as well as promoting and coordinating catechetical initiatives.
§ 2 . n It is the responsibility of the Episcopal Conference, if it is considered useful, to ensure the edition of catechisms for its territory, after confirmation from the Apostolic See.
§ 3 . Within the Episcopal Conference, a catechetical department can be established, whose main task will be to help each diocese in matters of catechesis.
775. § 2 . It is the responsibility of the Episcopal Conference, if it is considered useful, to ensure the edition of catechisms for its territory, with prior approval from the Apostolic See.
775. § 2, the approval of the local Ordinary is necessary to edit catechisms and other writings related to catechetical formation, as well as their translations.
§ 2 . In schools, whether elementary, middle or higher, those books that deal with issues relating to sacred Scripture, theology, canon law, ecclesiastical history and religious or moral subjects that have not been published with the approval of the competent ecclesiastical authority, or have subsequently obtained it, cannot be used as textbooks for teaching.
§ 3 . It is recommended that books on the subjects referred to in § 2 be submitted to the judgment of the local Ordinary, even if they are not used as textbooks in teaching, and also those writings that contain something that peculiarly affects religion or the integrity of customs.
§ 4 . In churches and oratories, books or other writings that deal with questions of religion or customs that have not been published with license from the competent ecclesiastical authority, or subsequently approved by it, cannot be displayed, sold or given.

776
776. By virtue of his office, the parish priest must take care of the catechetical formation of adults, young people and children, for which he will use the collaboration of the clerics assigned to the parish, the members of institutes of consecrated life and societies of apostolic life, taking into account the nature of each institute, and also of the lay faithful, especially catechists; All of these, if they are not legitimately prevented, do not refuse to give their help willingly. Promote and encourage the duty of parents in the family catechesis referred to in the c

777
777. The parish priest should especially ensure, taking into account the norms dictated by the diocesan Bishop:
1 that an appropriate catechesis be taught for the celebration of the sacraments;
2 that children prepare well to receive for the first time the sacraments of penance, the most holy Eucharist and confirmation, through a catechesis taught during the time that is convenient;
3 that they, after their first communion, be educated with a broader and deeper catechetical formation;
4 that, to the extent permitted by their own condition, catechetical training is also given to the physically or mentally handicapped;
5 that, through various forms and activities, the faith of young people and adults is strengthened, illustrated and developed.

778
778. Religious Superiors and those of societies of apostolic life should ensure that catechetical formation is diligently taught in their churches, schools and other works that have been entrusted to them in any way.

779
779. Catechetical formation must be given using all those means, teaching materials and instruments of social communication that are most effective so that the faithful, in a manner adapted to their way of being, ability, age and living conditions, can learn Catholic doctrine more completely and put it better into practice.

780
780. The local Ordinaries should ensure that the catechists are properly prepared to carry out their task well, that is, that they are given ongoing formation, and that they themselves know the doctrine of the Church well and learn theoretically and practically the norms of the pedagogical disciplines.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Competentias quasdam decernere of February 11, 2022)]:

781
781. Since, by its very nature, the entire Church is missionary, and the task of evangelization is the fundamental duty of the people of God, all the faithful, aware of their own responsibility, assume their part in missionary activity.

782
782. § 1 . The supreme direction and coordination of the initiatives and activities that refer to missionary work and missionary cooperation corresponds to the Roman Pontiff and the College of Bishops.
§ 2 . Each Bishop, insofar as he is responsible for the universal Church and all the Churches, shows a peculiar concern for the missionary task, above all by raising, promoting and sustaining missionary initiatives in his own particular Church.

783
783. Since by their very consecration they dedicate themselves to the service of the Church, the members of the institutes of consecrated life are obliged to contribute in a special way to the missionary task, according to the proper way of their institute.

784
784. Missionaries, that is, those who are sent by the competent ecclesiastical authority to carry out missionary work, may or may not be chosen from among the natives, whether they are secular clerics, members of institutes of consecrated life or of a society of apostolic life, or other lay faithful.

785
785. § 1 . To carry out the missionary task, catechists must be used, that is, lay faithful who are duly instructed and stand out for their Christian life, who, under the direction of a missionary, dedicate themselves to explaining evangelical doctrine and organizing liturgical acts and works of charity.
§ 2 . Catechists must be trained in schools designed for this purpose or, where there are none, under the direction of missionaries.

786
786. The missionary activity itself, through which the Church is established in towns or groups in which it is not yet rooted, is carried out by the Church mainly by sending preachers until the new Churches are fully constituted, that is, when they are provided with their own forces and sufficient means to be able to carry out the task of evangelizing on their own.

787
787. § 1 . With the testimony of their life and their word, missionaries should establish a sincere dialogue with those who do not believe in Christ, so that, in a manner adapted to their mentality and culture, they can open the paths by which they can be led to know the evangelical message.
§ 2 . Take care to teach the truths of the faith to those who you consider prepared to receive the evangelical message, so that, by freely asking for it, they can be admitted to the reception of baptism.

788
788. § 1 . Those who have expressed their willingness to embrace faith in Christ, once the time of precatechumenate has expired, are admitted in liturgical ceremonies to the catechumenate, and their names are inscribed in a book intended for this purpose.
§ 2 . Through the teaching and learning of the Christian life, catechumens must be properly initiated into the mystery of salvation, and introduced to the life of faith, liturgy and charity of the people of God, and of the apostolate.
§ 3 . It is up to the Episcopal Conferences to publish statutes that regulate the catechumenate, determining what obligations catechumens must fulfill and what prerogatives are recognized.

789
789. Neophytes should be trained with appropriate teaching so that they know more deeply the evangelical truth and the obligations that, through baptism, they have assumed and must fulfill; and a sincere love for Christ and his Church will be instilled in them.

790
790. § 1 . In the mission territories, the diocesan Bishop is responsible for:
1 promote, direct and coordinate initiatives and works that refer to missionary activity;
2 take care that the appropriate agreements are made with the Moderators of the institutes that are dedicated to missionary work, and that relations with them benefit the mission.
§ 2 . All missionaries, including religious and their auxiliaries who reside within the Bishop's demarcation, are subject to the prescriptions of the diocesan Bishop indicated in § 1, 1.

791
791. In all dioceses, to promote missionary cooperation:
1 foster missionary vocations;
2 a priest be assigned to effectively promote initiatives in favor of the missions, especially the Pontifical Mission Societies;
3 celebrate the annual day in favor of the missions;
4 A proportionate quota is paid each year for the missions, which will be remitted to the Holy See.

792
792. Episcopal Conferences must create and promote institutions that fraternally welcome and help with appropriate pastoral care to those who, for reasons of work or study, come to their territory from mission lands.

793
793. § 1 . Parents and those who take their place have the obligation and the right to educate their children; Catholic parents also have the obligation and the right to choose those means and institutions through which, according to the circumstances of each place, they can best provide for the Catholic education of their children.
§ 2 . Parents also have the right to have civil society provide them with the help they need to provide their children with a Catholic education.

794
794. § 1 . In a singular way, the duty and right to educate belongs to the Church, to whom God has entrusted the mission of helping men so that they can reach the fullness of the Christian life.
§ 2 . Pastors of souls have the duty to provide what is necessary so that all the faithful receive a Catholic education.

795
795. Since true education must seek the integral formation of the human person, in order to its ultimate goal and, simultaneously, to the common good of society, children and young people must be educated so that they can harmoniously develop their physical, moral and intellectual gifts, acquire a more perfect sense of responsibility and a correct use of freedom, and prepare to participate actively in social life.

796
796. § 1 . Among the means to achieve education, the faithful highly value schools, which constitute a primary help for parents in fulfilling their duty to educate.
§ 2 . It is necessary for parents to cooperate closely with the teachers of the schools to which they entrust the education of their children; The teachers, in turn, in fulfilling their duties, must work closely with the parents, to whom they must listen willingly, and whose associations or meetings must be organized and highly appreciated.

797
797. It is necessary that parents have true freedom to choose schools; Therefore, the faithful must be solicitous so that civil society recognizes this parental freedom and, in accordance with distributive justice, also protects it with economic aid.

798
798. Parents must entrust their children to those schools in which a Catholic education is taught; But, if this is not possible, they have the obligation to ensure that proper Catholic education is organized outside the schools.

799
799. The faithful must strive so that, in civil society, the laws that regulate the training of young people also provide for their religious and moral education in the same schools, according to the conscience of their parents.

800
800. § 1 . The Church has the right to establish and direct schools of any subject, gender and grade.
§2 . Let the faithful promote Catholic schools, helping to the extent of their strength to create and sustain them.

801
801. Religious institutes whose mission is teaching, remaining faithful to this mission of theirs, endeavor to dedicate themselves to Catholic education also through their schools, established with the consent of the diocesan Bishop.

802
802. § 1 . If there are no schools in which an education imbued with the Christian spirit is taught, it is up to the diocesan Bishop to ensure their creation.
§ 2 . Where appropriate, the diocesan Bishop also provides for the creation of professional and technical schools, and others that are required due to special needs.

803
803. § 1 . A Catholic school is understood to be one that is run by the competent ecclesiastical authority or a public ecclesiastical legal entity, or that the ecclesiastical authority recognizes as such by written document.
§ 2 . Teaching and education in a Catholic school must be based on the principles of Catholic doctrine; and teachers must stand out for their right doctrine and integrity of life.
§ 3 . No school, even if it is actually Catholic, can adopt the name "Catholic school" without the consent of the competent ecclesiastical authority.

804
804. § 1 . The Catholic religious teaching and education that is taught in any schools or carried out in the various media of social communication depends on the authority of the Church; It is up to the Episcopal Conference to give general regulations on this activity, and it is up to the diocesan Bishop to organize it and exercise oversight over it.
§ 2 . The local Ordinary should ensure that the teachers who are assigned to teach religion in schools, even in non-Catholic ones, stand out for their correct doctrine, for the testimony of their Christian life and for their pedagogical aptitude.

805
805. The local Ordinary, within his diocese, has the right to appoint or approve teachers of religion, as well as to remove or demand that they be removed when a religious or moral reason requires it.

806
806. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop has the right to supervise and visit Catholic schools established in his territory, even those founded or directed by members of religious institutes; It is also responsible for dictating regulations on the general organization of Catholic schools; Such rules are also valid for schools run by members of these institutes, without prejudice to their autonomy with regard to the internal regime of these schools.
§ 2 . Under the supervision of the local Ordinary, the Moderators of Catholic schools must ensure that the formation given in them is, from a scientific point of view, of at least the same category as in other schools in the region.

807
807. The Church has the right to establish and direct universities that contribute to the increase of higher culture and a fuller promotion of the human person, as well as to the fulfillment of the teaching function of the Church itself.

808
808. No university, even if it is in fact Catholic, uses the title or name of "Catholic university" without the consent of the competent ecclesiastical authority.

809
809. Episcopal Conferences should ensure that, if possible and convenient, there are universities or at least faculties adequately distributed in their territory, in which, with respect for their scientific autonomy, the different disciplines are researched and taught in accordance with Catholic doctrine.

810
810. § 1 . The competent authority according to the statutes must ensure that, in Catholic universities, professors are appointed who stand out, not only for their scientific and pedagogical suitability, but also for the rectitude of their doctrine and integrity of life; and that, when such requirements are lacking, they are removed from their position, observing the procedure provided for in the statutes.
§ 2 The Episcopal Conferences and the interested diocesan Bishops have the duty and the right to ensure that the principles of Catholic doctrine are faithfully observed in these universities.

811
811. § 1 . The competent ecclesiastical authority should ensure that in Catholic universities a faculty, an institute or, at least, a chair of theology is erected in which classes are also given to lay students.
§ 2 . In Catholic universities there must be classes in which theological questions that are in connection with the subjects of their faculties are dealt with above all.

812
812. Those who explain theological disciplines in any institute of higher learning must have a mandate from the competent ecclesiastical authority.
812. and 813 about Catholic universities apply equally to ecclesiastical universities and faculties.

813
813. The diocesan Bishop must provide intense pastoral care for the students, even establishing a parish, or, at least, through priests permanently assigned to this task; and ensure that in universities, even non-Catholic ones, there are Catholic university centers that provide help, especially spiritual, to youth.

814
814. What is prescribed for universities applies equally to other institutes of higher learning.

815
815. By virtue of its duty to announce the revealed truth, the universities and ecclesiastical faculties ordered to the investigation of sacred disciplines or those others related to them, and to the scientific instruction of students in these subjects, are specific to the Church.

816
816. § 1 . Universities and ecclesiastical faculties can only be established by erection of the Apostolic See or with approval granted by it; It is also responsible for their supreme direction.
§ 2 . All universities and ecclesiastical faculties must have their own statutes and curriculum approved by the Apostolic See.

817
817. No university or faculty that has not been erected or approved by the Apostolic See can grant academic degrees that have canonical effects in the Church.

818
818. The prescriptions of cc. 810,

819
819. To the extent that the good of a diocese or a religious institute, or even of the universal Church, requires it, the diocesan Bishops or the competent Superiors of the institutes must send to the universities or ecclesiastical faculties young people, clerics and members of the institutes who stand out for their character, virtue and talent.

820
820. The Moderators and professors of the universities and ecclesiastical faculties should ensure that the various faculties of the university collaborate mutually, as far as the subject allows, and that this collaboration also occurs between the university or faculty itself and the other universities or faculties, including non-ecclesiastical ones, so that common work contributes to the better progress of science through conferences, coordinated research programs and other means.

821
821. Let the Episcopal Conference and the diocesan Bishop ensure that, as far as possible, higher institutes of religious sciences are created in which theological disciplines and those others that belong to Christian culture are taught.

822
822. § 1 . The pastors of the Church, in use of a right of the Church and in compliance with their duty, try to use the media of social communication.
§ 2 . The pastors themselves should ensure that the faithful are instructed about their duty to cooperate so that the use of the instruments of social communication is enlivened by the human and Christian spirit.
§ 3 . All the faithful, especially those who in some way participate in the organization or use of these means, must be solicitous in providing support to pastoral activity, so that the Church effectively carries out its mission, also through these means.

823
823. § 1 . To preserve the integrity of the truths of faith and customs, the pastors of the Church have the duty and the right to ensure that neither writings nor the use of social media damage the faith and customs of the Christian faithful; Likewise, to demand that the faithful submit to their judgment the writings that they are going to publish and that are related to faith or customs; and also to reprove writings harmful to the rectitude of the faith or to good customs.
§ 2 . The duty and right discussed in the § 1 correspond to the Bishops, both individually and gathered in particular councils or Episcopal Conferences, with respect to the faithful entrusted to them; and to the supreme authority of the Church with respect to all the people of God.

824
824. § 1 . Unless otherwise established, the local Ordinary whose license or approval must be requested according to the canons of this title to publish books, is the local Ordinary of the author or the Ordinary of the place where the books are published.
§ 2 . What is established in this title about books must be applied to any writings intended for public dissemination, unless otherwise stated.

825
825. § 1 . The books of sacred Scripture can only be published if they have been approved by the Apostolic See or by the Episcopal Conference; Likewise, in order for translations to be edited into the vernacular language, they must have been approved by the same authority and must be accompanied by the necessary and sufficient explanatory notes.
§ 2 . With license from the Episcopal Conference, the Catholic faithful can prepare and publish, also in collaboration with separated brothers, translations of the sacred Scripture accompanied by the appropriate explanatory notes.

826
826. § 1 . As regards liturgical books, observe the prescriptions of c. 838.
§ 2 . To republish liturgical books or parts thereof, as well as their translations into the vernacular language, it is necessary to confirm their conformity with the approved edition, through testimony from the Ordinary of the place where they are published.
§ 3 . Prayer books for public or private use of the faithful are not to be published without permission from the local Ordinary.

827
827. § 1 . Without prejudice to what is prescribed by the c

828
828. It is not permitted to republish collections of decrees or acts published by an ecclesiastical authority without having previously obtained a license from the same authority, and observing the conditions imposed by it.

829
829. The approval or license to edit a work is valid for the original text, but not for successive editions or translations of it.

830
830. § 1 . Respecting the right of each local Ordinary to entrust judgment on the books to people whom he himself has approved, the Episcopal Conference can draw up a list of censors, who stand out for their science, correct doctrine and prudence and are at the disposal of the diocesan curias, or also constitute a commission of censors, which the local Ordinaries can consult.
§ 2 . When carrying out his duty, leaving aside all respect for persons, the censor should keep in mind only the doctrine of the Church on faith and customs, as proposed by the ecclesiastical magisterium.
§ 3 . The censor must give his opinion in writing; and if this is favorable, the Ordinary will grant, according to his prudent judgment, the license for the edition, mentioning his own name, as well as the date and place of granting the license; If he does not grant it, the Ordinary communicates to the author of the work the reasons for the refusal.

831
831. § 1 . Without just and reasonable cause, the faithful should not write anything in newspapers, pamphlets or magazines that clearly tend to attack the Catholic religion or good morals; Clergy and members of religious institutes can only do so with permission from the local Ordinary.
§ 2 . It is up to the Episcopal Conferences to set standards regarding the necessary requirements for clerics or members of religious institutes to take part in radio or television broadcasts that deal with issues relating to Catholic doctrine or customs.

832
832. Members of religious institutes also need permission from their major Superior, in accordance with the norm of the constitutions, to publish writings that refer to questions of religion or customs.

833
833. They have the obligation to personally issue the profession of faith, according to the formula approved by the Apostolic See:
1. before the president or his delegate all those who take part, with a deliberative or consultative vote, in an Ecumenical or particular Council, synod of Bishops and diocesan synod; and the president before the Council or synod;
2. those who have been promoted to the dignity of cardinal, according to the statutes of the sacred College;
3. before the delegate from the Apostolic See, all those who have been promoted to the episcopate, and also those who are equal to the diocesan Bishop;
4. the diocesan Administrator, before the college of consultants;
5. the Vicars General, Episcopal Vicars and Judicial Vicars, before the diocesan Bishop or his delegate;
6. the parish priests, the rector and the professors of theology and philosophy in the seminaries, when they begin to exercise their position, before the local Ordinary or a delegate of his; also those who are going to receive the order of the diaconate;
7. the rector of an ecclesiastical or Catholic university, when he begins to exercise his office, before the Grand Chancellor or, failing that, before the local Ordinary or before their delegates; professors who give classes on subjects related to faith or customs in any university, when they begin to exercise their position, before the rector, if he is a priest, or before the local Ordinary or before his delegates;
8. Superiors in religious institutes and clerical societies of apostolic life, according to the norm of the constitutions.

834
834. § 1 . The Church fulfills the function of sanctifying in a peculiar way through the sacred liturgy, which is rightly considered as the exercise of the priestly function of Jesus Christ, in which the sanctification of men is signified by sensible signs and is carried out according to the manner proper to each one of them, at the same time that the public worship of God is exercised in full by the mystical Body of Jesus Christ, that is, the Head and the members.
§ 2 . This worship is paid when it is offered in the name of the Church by legitimately designated persons and through acts approved by the authority of the Church.

835
835. § 1 . Firstly, the function of sanctifying is exercised by the Bishops, who, having the fullness of the priesthood, are the main dispensers of the mysteries of God and, in the Church entrusted to them, the moderators, promoters and custodians of all liturgical life.
§ 2 . It is also exercised by priests, who, participating in the priesthood of Christ, as his ministers, consecrate themselves to the celebration of divine worship and the sanctification of the people under the authority of the Bishop.
§ 3 . In the celebration of divine worship, deacons act according to the provisions of law.
§ 4 . The other faithful also have their own part in the function of sanctifying, actively participating, according to their own way, in the liturgical celebrations and especially in the Eucharist; Parents participate in the same function in a peculiar way, imbuing married life with the Christian spirit and seeking the Christian education of their children.

836
836. Since Christian worship, in which the common priesthood of the faithful is exercised, is a work that comes from faith and is based on it, sacred ministers must diligently seek to arouse and illustrate faith, especially with the ministry of the word, by which faith is born and nourished.

837
837. § 1 . Liturgical actions are not private actions, but celebrations of the Church itself, which is a "sacrament of unity", that is, a holy people gathered and ordered under the guidance of the Bishops; Therefore, they belong to the entire body of the Church, they manifest it and realize it; but they affect each of its members differently, according to the diversity of orders, functions and current participation.
§ 2 . Liturgical actions, to the extent that their very nature calls for a community celebration and where this can be done, will be carried out with the assistance and active participation of the faithful.
[*] 838 § 1 . The ordination of the sacred liturgy depends exclusively on the authority of the Church, which resides in the Apostolic See and, according to the norms of law, in the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . It is the responsibility of the Apostolic See to order the sacred liturgy of the universal Church, edit the liturgical books, review their translations into vernacular languages ​​and ensure that the liturgical norms are faithfully fulfilled everywhere.
§ 3 . It is up to the Episcopal Conferences to prepare the translations of the liturgical books into the vernacular languages, adapting them appropriately within the limits established in the liturgical books themselves, and to edit them with the prior review of the Holy See.
§ 4 . The diocesan Bishop, in the Church entrusted to him and within the limits of his competence, is responsible for giving mandatory norms for all on liturgical matters.

838
838. Codicis Iuris Canonici immutantur (September 3, 2017).
838. §§ 3 and 4, it is necessary to establish what refers to its celebration, administration and lawful reception, as well as the ritual that must be observed in its celebration.

839
839. § 1 . The Church also carries out the function of sanctifying by other means, already with prayers, by which it prays to God that the faithful be sanctified in the truth; already with works of penance and charity, which contribute greatly to the Kingdom of Christ being rooted and strengthened in souls, and also cooperating in the salvation of the world.
§ 2 . The local Ordinaries should ensure that the prayers and pious and sacred practices of the Christian people are in full conformity with the norms of the Church.
__________________
[*] For the modifications of this canon cf. Litterae Apostolicae Motu Proprio datae Quibus nonnulla in can.

840
840. The sacraments of the New Testament, instituted by Christ Our Lord and entrusted to the Church, insofar as they are actions of Christ and the Church, are signs and means with which faith is expressed and strengthened, God is worshiped and the sanctification of men is carried out, and therefore contribute greatly to creating, corroborating and manifesting ecclesiastical communion; For this reason, both the sacred ministers and the other faithful must behave with great veneration and due diligence when celebrating them.

841
841. Since the sacraments are the same for the entire Church and belong to the divine deposit, it is exclusively up to the supreme authority of the Church to approve or define what is required for their validity, and to herself or another competent authority, in accordance with the c

842
842. § 1 . Whoever has not received baptism cannot be validly admitted to the other sacraments.
§ 2 . The sacraments of baptism, confirmation and the most holy Eucharist are so closely linked to each other that they are all necessary for full Christian initiation.

843
843. § 1 . Sacred ministers cannot deny the sacraments to those who request them in a timely manner, are well disposed, and are not prohibited by law from receiving them.
§ 2 The pastors of souls and the other faithful, each according to their ecclesiastical function, have the obligation to ensure that those who request the sacraments prepare to receive them with due evangelization and catechetical training, taking into account the norms given by the competent ecclesiastical authority.

844
844. § 1 . Catholic ministers licitly administer the sacraments only to the Catholic faithful, who, in turn, only receive them licitly from Catholic ministers, except as established in §§ 2, 3 and 4 of this canon, and in the c

845
845. § 1 . The sacraments of baptism, confirmation and orders imprint character and, therefore, cannot be reiterated.
§ 2 . If, after diligent investigation, prudent doubt remains as to whether the sacraments discussed in § 1 were actually received or were validly received, let them be administered under condition.

846
846. § 1 . In the celebration of the sacraments, the liturgical books approved by the competent authority must be faithfully observed; Therefore, no one adds, deletes or changes anything on their own initiative.
§ 2 . The minister must celebrate the sacraments according to his own rite.

847
847. § 1 . To administer the sacraments in which holy oils must be used, the minister must use olive oil or oil from other plants, recently consecrated or blessed by the Bishop, leaving aside what is prescribed in c. 999, 2; and the old ones should not be used if there is no need.
§ 2 . The parish priest must obtain the sacred oils from the Bishop himself and diligently store them in a decent place.

848
848. Apart from the oblations determined by the competent authority, the minister must not ask for anything for the administration of the sacraments, and must always ensure that those in need are not deprived of the help of the sacraments due to their poverty.

849
849. Baptism, the door of the sacraments, whose reception in fact or at least of desire is necessary for salvation, by which men are freed from sins, reborn as children of God and incorporated into the Church, being configured with Christ by the indelible character, is validly conferred only through ablution with true water accompanied by the due verbal form.

850
850. Baptism is administered according to the ritual prescribed in the approved liturgical books, except in cases of urgent need, in which only those things must be performed that are necessary for the validity of the sacrament.

851
851. The celebration of baptism must be adequately prepared; therefore:
1 the adult who wishes to receive baptism must be admitted to the catechumenate and, to the extent possible, be taken through successive steps to sacramental initiation, according to the initiation ritual adapted by the Episcopal Conference, and taking into account the peculiar norms dictated by it;
2 the parents of the child who is going to be baptized, and also those who will assume the role of godparents, must be suitably enlightened about the meaning of this sacrament and the obligations it entails; and the parish priest must ensure, personally or through other people, that the parents are duly instructed with pastoral exhortations and even with common prayer, bringing together several families, and visiting them where it is possible to do so.

852
852. § 1 . The provisions of the canons on adult baptism apply to all those who have passed from childhood and have the use of reason.
§ 2 . Also with regard to baptism, he who does not have the use of reason is assimilated to the infant.

853
853. Except in cases of necessity, the water used to administer baptism must be blessed according to the prescriptions of the liturgical books.

854
854. Baptism must be administered by immersion or infusion, in accordance with the norms of the Episcopal Conference.

855
855. Parents, godparents and the parish priest should ensure that a name foreign to Christian sentiment is not imposed.

856
856. Although baptism can be celebrated on any day, it is nevertheless advisable that, ordinarily, it be administered on Sunday or, if possible, on the Easter Vigil.

857
857. § 1 . Outside the case of necessity, the proper place for baptism is a church or oratory.
§ 2 . As a general rule, the adult should be baptized in his or her own parish church, and the child in the parish church of his or her parents, unless a just cause advises otherwise.

858
858. § 1 . Every parish church must have a baptismal font, preserving the cumulative right already acquired by other churches.
§ 2 . The Ordinary of the place, having heard the parish priest of the place in question, may allow or order that, for the convenience of the faithful, there is also a baptismal font in another church or oratory within the limits of the parish.
858. § 2, baptism can and should be conferred in another nearby church or oratory, or in another decent place.

859
859. If, due to remoteness or other circumstances, the person to be baptized cannot go or be taken without serious inconvenience to the parish church or to that other church or oratory in question in the c

860
860. § 1 . Outside of cases of necessity, baptism should not be administered in private homes, unless the local Ordinary has permitted it for serious reasons.
§ 2 . Unless the diocesan Bishop establishes otherwise, baptism should not be celebrated in hospitals, except in cases of necessity or when other pastoral reasons require it.

861
861. § 2 .
§ 2 . In case of necessity, or when a true spiritual utility advises it, and provided that the danger of error or indifferentism is avoided, it is permitted for the faithful for whom it is physically or morally impossible to go to a Catholic minister, to receive the sacraments of penance, Eucharist and anointing of the sick from those non-Catholic ministers, in whose Church those sacraments are valid.
§ 3 . Catholic ministers licitly administer the sacraments of penance, Eucharist and anointing of the sick to members of Eastern Churches that are not in full communion with the Catholic Church, if they request them spontaneously and are well disposed; and this norm also applies to the members of other Churches, which, in the opinion of the Apostolic See, are in the same condition as the aforementioned Eastern Churches, with regard to the sacraments.
§ 4 . If there is a danger of death or, in the opinion of the diocesan Bishop or the Episcopal Conference, another serious need is urgent, Catholic ministers can licitly administer those same sacraments also to other Christians who are not in full communion with the Catholic Church, when they cannot go to a minister of their own community and request it spontaneously, as long as they profess the Catholic faith regarding those sacraments and are well disposed.
§ 5 . For the cases excepted in §§ 2, 3 and 4, the diocesan Bishop or the Episcopal Conference must not give general norms without having consulted the authority, at least local, of the Church or non-Catholic community in question.
861. § 1 . Remaining in force what is prescribed in c. 530, 1, the Bishop, the priest and the deacon are ordinary ministers of baptism.
§ 2 . If the ordinary minister is absent or prevented, the baptism is licitly administered by a catechist or another designated for this function by the local Ordinary, and, in case of need, any person who has the proper intention; and pastors of souls, especially the parish priest, must ensure that the faithful know how to baptize properly.

862
862. Except in cases of necessity, it is lawful for no one to baptize in another's territory without due license, not even his subjects.

863
863. The baptism of adults, at least of those who have reached the age of fourteen, be offered to the Bishop so that he may administer it himself, if he considers it appropriate.

864
864. Any human being not yet baptized, and only him, is capable of receiving baptism.

865
865. § 1 . In order for an adult to be baptized, he or she must have expressed his or her desire to receive this sacrament, be sufficiently instructed in the truths of faith and Christian obligations, and have been tested in the Christian life through the catechumenate; He must also be exhorted to grieve for his sins.
§ 2 . An adult who is in danger of death may be baptized if, having some knowledge of the main truths of the faith, he expresses in any way his intention to receive baptism and promises that he will observe the commandments of the Christian religion.

866
866. Unless a serious cause obstructs, the adult who is baptized must be confirmed immediately after baptism and participate in the Eucharistic celebration, also receiving communion.

867
867. § 1 . Parents have the obligation to have their children baptized in the first weeks; As soon as possible after birth and even before it, go to the priest to ask for the sacrament for your child and prepare properly.
§ 2 . If the child is in danger of death, he must be baptized without delay.

868
868. § 1 . To licitly baptize a child, it is required:
1 that the parents, or at least one of the two, or those who legitimately act in their place, give their consent;
2 n that there is a well-founded hope that the child will be educated in the Catholic religion, without prejudice to the § 3; If this hope is completely lacking, the baptism must be deferred, according to the provisions of particular law, making the reason known to the parents.
§ 2 . The child of Catholic parents, and even of non-Catholic parents, in danger of death, can lawfully be baptized, even against the will of his parents.
§ 3 . n The child of non-Catholic Christians may be licitly baptized if the parents or at least one of them or the person who legitimately occupies their place request it and if it is impossible for them, physically or morally, to access their own minister.

869
869. § 1 . When there is doubt as to whether someone was baptized, or whether baptism was validly administered, and the doubt remains after careful investigation, he is to be baptized under condition.
§ 2 . Those baptized in a non-Catholic ecclesial community should not be baptized under condition, unless there is serious reason to doubt the validity of their baptism, taking into account both the material and the formula used in its administration, and the intention of the baptized person, if they were an adult, and of the minister.
§ 3 . If, in the cases dealt with in §§ 1 and 2, there is doubt about the administration of baptism or its validity, the sacrament should not be administered before the doctrine about it has been taught to the person who is to receive it, if he is an adult, and the reasons why the validity of the baptism previously celebrated has been expressed to him, or to his parents if it is an infant.

870
870. A foundling or abandoned child must be baptized, unless its baptism is established after a diligent investigation.

871
871. To the extent possible, aborted fetuses should be baptized, if they are alive.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio De concordia inter Codices, dated May 31, 2016)]:
2 that there is a well-founded hope that the child will be educated in the Catholic religion; If this hope is completely lacking, the baptism must be deferred, according to the provisions of particular law, making the parents aware of the reason.

872
872. To the extent possible, the person who is going to receive baptism must be given a godfather, whose role is to assist the adult who is baptized in his Christian initiation, and, together with the parents, present the child who is going to receive baptism and ensure that he then leads a Christian life consistent with baptism and faithfully fulfills the obligations inherent to it.

873
873. Have only one godfather or one godmother, or one and both.

874
874. § 1 . For someone to be admitted as a sponsor, it is necessary that:
1 has been chosen by the person who is going to be baptized or by his parents or by those who occupy his place or, in the absence of these, by the parish priest or minister; and that it has the capacity for this mission and the intention to carry it out;
2 has reached the age of sixteen, unless the diocesan Bishop establishes another age, or unless, for just cause, the parish priest or minister considers an exception admissible;
3 is Catholic, is confirmed, has already received the most holy sacrament of the Eucharist and leads, at the same time, a life consistent with the faith and the mission that he or she is going to assume;
4 is not affected by a canonical penalty, legitimately imposed or declared;
5 is not the father or mother of the one to be baptized.
§ 2 . The baptized person who belongs to a non-Catholic ecclesial community can only be admitted together with a Catholic godfather, and exclusively as a witness to the baptism.

875
875. Whoever administers the baptism ensures that, if the godfather is missing, there is at least one witness by whom his administration can be proven.

876
876. If no harm is caused to anyone, to prove baptism the statement of a single witness immune from all suspicion is sufficient, or the oath of the baptized person himself, if he received the sacrament as an adult.

877
877. § 1 . The parish priest of the place where the baptism is celebrated must diligently and without delay write down in the baptism book the name of the baptized, mentioning the minister, the parents, godparents, witnesses, if any, and the place and day on which it was administered, also indicating the day and place of the birth.
§ 2 . When it is a child of a single mother, the mother's name must be registered, if her maternity is publicly stated or she herself requests it voluntarily in writing or before two witnesses; and the name of the father must also be registered, if his paternity is proven by a public document or by his own statement before the parish priest and two witnesses; In other cases, only the name of the baptized person will be registered, without mentioning the name of the father or parents at all.
§ 3 . If it is an adopted child, the name of those who adopted it will be registered and also, at least if this is done in the civil registry of the region, that of the natural parents, as established in §§ 1 and 2, taking into account the provisions of the Episcopal Conference.

878
878. If the baptism was not administered by the parish priest nor while he was present, the minister, whoever he may be, must inform the parish priest of that parish in which the sacrament was administered, so that he can make the registration as indicated in the c

879
879. The sacrament of confirmation, which imprints character and by which the baptized, advancing along the path of Christian initiation, are enriched with the gift of the Holy Spirit and linked more perfectly to the Church, strengthens and forces them with greater force to, in word and deed, be witnesses of Christ and propagate and defend the faith.

880
880. § 1 . The sacrament of confirmation is administered by anointing with chrism on the forehead, which is done with the laying on of the hand, and by the words prescribed in the approved liturgical books.
§ 2 . The chrism that must be used in confirmation must be consecrated by the Bishop, even if it is a priest who administers the sacrament.

881
881. It is appropriate that the sacrament of confirmation be celebrated in a church and within the Mass; However, for just and reasonable cause, it can be celebrated outside of Mass and in any decent place.

882
882. The ordinary minister of confirmation is the Bishop; This sacrament is also validly administered by the priest endowed with faculty by universal law or by peculiar concession of the competent authority.

883
883. They enjoy ipso iure the power to confirm:
1 within the limits of their jurisdiction, who in law are equal to the diocesan Bishop;
2 with respect to the person in question, the priest who, by reason of his office or by order of the diocesan Bishop, baptizes one who has outlived childhood, or admits one already baptized into the full communion of the Catholic Church;
3 for those who are in danger of death, the parish priest, and even any priest.

884
884. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop must administer confirmation himself, or see to it that another Bishop administers it; But if necessity requires it, he can grant power to one or more specific priests to administer this sacrament.
§ 2 . For serious reasons, the Bishop, and also the priest endowed with the power to confirm by law or by concession of the competent authority, may, in particular cases, associate other priests who also administer the sacrament.

885
885. § 1 . The diocesan Bishop has the obligation to ensure that the sacrament of confirmation is administered to his subjects who duly and reasonably request it.
§ 2 . The priest who enjoys this faculty must use it towards those in whose favor the faculty has been granted.

886
886. § 1 . Within his diocese, the Bishop legitimately administers the sacrament of confirmation also to those faithful who are not his subjects, unless expressly prohibited by his own Ordinary.
§ 2 . To licitly administer confirmation in a foreign diocese, a Bishop needs permission from the diocesan Bishop, at least reasonably presumed, unless it concerns his own subjects.

887
887. Within the territory designated to him, the priest who enjoys the faculty of confirmation can licitly administer this sacrament also to strangers, unless prohibited by his own Ordinary; but, keeping in mind what is prescribed in c. 883, 3, cannot validly administer it to anyone in another's territory.

888
888. Within the territory in which they are empowered to confirm, ministers can administer this sacrament also in exempt places.

889
889. § 1 . Only every baptized person not yet confirmed is capable of receiving confirmation.
§ 2 . Outside of the danger of death, for someone to lawfully receive confirmation it is required that, if they have the use of reason, they are suitably instructed, well disposed and able to renew the promises of baptism.

890
890. The faithful are obliged to receive this sacrament at the appropriate time; Parents and pastors of souls, especially parish priests, ensure that the faithful are well prepared to receive it and that they receive it in a timely manner.

891
891. The sacrament of confirmation must be administered to the faithful around the age of discretion, unless the Episcopal Conference determines another age, or there is a danger of death or, in the opinion of the minister, a serious cause advises otherwise.

892
892. To the extent possible, the confirming party should have a godfather, whose responsibility it is to ensure that he behaves as a true witness of Christ and faithfully fulfills the obligations inherent to the sacrament.

893
893. § 1 . In order for someone to be a godfather, it is necessary that they meet the conditions expressed in c. 874.
§ 2 . It is convenient that the person who assumed that mission at baptism be chosen as godfather.

894
894. To prove the administration of confirmation, observe the prescriptions of c. 876.

895
895. The names of those confirmed must be registered in the confirmation book of the diocesan Curia, leaving a record of the minister, the parents and godparents, and the place and day of the administration of the sacrament, or, where ordered by the Episcopal Conference or the diocesan Bishop, in the book that must be kept in the parish archive; The parish priest must notify the parish priest of the place of baptism, so that the entry can be made in the baptism book in accordance with the c

896
896. If the local priest has not been present, the minister must, by himself or through another, communicate to him as soon as possible the confirmation administered.

897
897. The most august sacrament, in which Christ Our Lord himself is contained, offered and received, is the most holy Eucharist, by which the Church lives and continually grows. The Eucharistic Sacrifice, memorial of the death and resurrection of the Lord, in which the Sacrifice of the Cross is perpetuated throughout the centuries, is the culmination and source of all worship and of all Christian life, by which the unity of the people of God is signified and realized and the building of the body of Christ is brought to completion. Thus the other sacraments and all the ecclesiastical works of apostolate are closely united to the most holy Eucharist and are ordered to it.

898
898. Let the faithful pay the greatest veneration to the most holy Eucharist, taking an active part in the celebration of the most august Sacrifice, receiving this sacrament frequently and with great devotion, and worshiping it with utmost adoration; Pastors of souls, when expounding the doctrine on this sacrament, diligently instill this obligation in the faithful.

899
899. § 1 . The Eucharistic celebration is an action of Christ himself and of the Church, in which Christ Our Lord, substantially present under the species of bread and wine, through the ministry of the priest, offers himself to God the Father, and is given as spiritual food to the faithful united to his oblation.
§ 2 . In the Eucharistic Assembly, presided over by the Bishop, or by a priest under his authority, who act by personifying Christ, the people of God gather in unity, and all the faithful who attend, both clerics and laymen, take an active part, each one according to their own way, in accordance with the diversity of orders and liturgical functions.
§ 3 . The Eucharistic celebration must be arranged in such a way that all those who participate in it receive abundant fruits, for which Christ Our Lord instituted the Eucharistic Sacrifice.

900
900. § 1 . Only the validly ordained priest is a minister capable of preparing the sacrament of the Eucharist, acting in the person of Christ.
§ 2 . The priest not prevented by canon law celebrates the Eucharist lawfully, observing the prescriptions of the canons that follow.

901
901. The priest has the power to apply the Mass for anyone, both living and deceased.

902
902. Priests may concelebrate the Eucharist, unless the usefulness of the faithful requires or advises otherwise, remaining, however, the freedom of each one to celebrate the Eucharist individually, but not while it is being concelebrated in the same church or oratory.

903
903. Even if the rector of the church does not know him, the priest may be admitted to celebrate as long as he presents a letter of recommendation from his Ordinary or Superior, given at least within the year, or it can be prudently judged that nothing prevents him from celebrating.

904
904. Priests, always keeping in mind that in the mystery of the Eucharistic Sacrifice the work of redemption is continually carried out, must celebrate it frequently; Furthermore, the daily celebration is highly recommended, which, although it cannot be held with the assistance of the faithful, is an action of Christ and the Church, in the realization of which the priests fulfill their main ministry.

905
905. § 1 . Except for those cases in which, according to law, the Eucharist can be celebrated or concelebrated more than once on the same day, it is not lawful for the priest to celebrate more than once a day.
§ 2 . If there is a shortage of priests, the local Ordinary can grant that, with just cause, they celebrate twice a day, and even, when a pastoral need demands it, three times on Sundays and holy days of obligation.

906
906. Without just and reasonable cause, the priest may not celebrate the Eucharistic Sacrifice without the participation of at least some of the faithful.

907
907. In the Eucharistic celebration, deacons and lay people are not allowed to say prayers, especially the Eucharistic prayer, nor to perform those actions that are proper to the celebrating priest.

908
908. Catholic priests are prohibited from concelebrating the Eucharist with priests or ministers of Churches or ecclesial communities that are not in full communion with the Catholic Church.

909
909. The priest must not fail to prepare properly with prayer to celebrate the Eucharistic Sacrifice, and give thanks to God at the end.

910
910. § 1 . The bishop, the priest and the deacon are ordinary ministers of holy communion.
§ 2 . The extraordinary minister of holy communion is the acolyte, or another faithful person designated according to c.

911
911. § 1 . They have the obligation and right to bring the Holy Eucharist to the sick as Viaticum, the parish priest and the parochial vicars, the chaplains and the Superior of the community in the religious institutes or societies of clerical apostolic life with respect to all those who are in the house.
§ 2 . In case of necessity, or with at least presumed permission from the parish priest, chaplain or Superior, who must be informed afterwards, any priest or other minister of Holy Communion must do so.

912
912. Every baptized person who is not prohibited by law can and must be admitted to Holy Communion.

913
913. § 1 . In order for the most holy Eucharist to be administered to children, it is required that they have sufficient knowledge and have received careful preparation, so that they understand the mystery of Christ to the best of their ability, and can receive the Body of the Lord with faith and devotion.
§ 2 . The most holy Eucharist may, however, be administered to children who are in danger of death, if they are able to distinguish the Body of Christ from common food and to receive communion with reverence.

914
914. Parents in the first place, and those who take their place, as well as the parish priest, have the obligation to ensure that children who have reached the use of reason are adequately prepared and nourished as soon as possible, after sacramental confession, with this divine food; It is also the responsibility of the parish priest to ensure that children who have not yet reached the age of reason, or those whom he deems not sufficiently willing, do not receive the Holy Eucharist.

915
915. Those who have been excommunicated and those who are in question after the imposition or declaration of the penalty, and those who obstinately persist in a manifest grave sin, should not be admitted to Holy Communion.

916
916. Anyone who is aware of being in serious sin should not celebrate Mass or receive communion from the Body of the Lord without first attending sacramental confession, unless there is a serious reason and there is no opportunity to confess; and in this case, keep in mind that you are obliged to make an act of perfect contrition, which includes the intention of confessing as soon as possible.

917
917. Whoever has already received the most holy Eucharist, can receive it again on the same day only within the Eucharistic celebration in which he participates, remaining safe as prescribed by the c

918
918. It is strongly advised that the faithful receive Holy Communion within the Eucharistic celebration; However, when they request it for just cause, communion must be administered outside of Mass, observing the liturgical rites.

919
919. § 1 . Whoever is going to receive the Holy Eucharist must abstain from taking any food and drink at least one hour before Holy Communion, with the exception of water and medicines.
§ 2 . The priest who celebrates the Most Holy Eucharist two or three times on the same day can take something before the second or third Mass, even if it does not last for an hour.
§ 3 . Elderly or sick people, and also those who care for them, can receive the Holy Eucharist even if they have had something to drink in the immediately preceding hour.

920
920. § 1 . Every faithful, after the first communion, is obliged to take communion at least once a year.
§ 2 . This precept must be fulfilled during the Easter season, unless for just cause it is fulfilled at another time within the year.

921
921. § 2 .
921. § 1 . Viaticum must be administered to the faithful who, for any reason, are in danger of death.
§ 2 . Even if they had received Holy Communion on the same day, it is highly advisable that those who find themselves in danger of death take communion again.
§ 3 . While the danger of death lasts, it is advisable to administer communion several times, on different days.

922
922. Viaticum for the sick should not be delayed too long; Those who practice the healing of souls must diligently monitor so that the sick receive it while they still have full use of their faculties.

923
923. The faithful can participate in the Eucharistic Sacrifice and receive Holy Communion in any Catholic rite, except as prescribed in c. 844.

924
924. § 1 . The sacrosanct Eucharistic Sacrifice must be offered with bread and wine, to which a little water must be mixed.
§ 2 . The bread must be exclusively wheat and made recently, so that there is no danger of corruption.
§ 3 . The wine must be natural, from the fruit of the vine, and not corrupted.

925
925. Holy Communion be administered under the single species of bread or, in accordance with the liturgical laws, under both species; if necessary, also under the sole species of wine.

926
926. According to the ancient tradition of the Latin Church, the priest, wherever he celebrates Mass, must do so using unleavened bread.

927
927. It is strictly prohibited, even in cases of extreme necessity, to consecrate one matter without the other, or both outside the Eucharistic celebration.

928
928. The Eucharistic celebration must be held in the Latin language, or in another language as long as the liturgical texts have been legitimately approved.

929
929. When celebrating and administering the Eucharist, priests and deacons must wear the sacred vestments prescribed by the rubrics.

930
930. § 1 . The sick or elderly priest, if he is not able to stand, may celebrate the Eucharistic Sacrifice seated, always observing the liturgical laws, but not with the assistance of the people, unless with the permission of the local Ordinary.
§2 . The priest who is blind or suffers from another illness can celebrate the Eucharistic Sacrifice with any text of the Mass from among those approved, and with the assistance, if the case requires it, of another priest or deacon, or also of a suitably instructed layman, to help him.

931
931. The celebration and administration of the Eucharist can take place every day and at any time, with the exceptions established in the liturgical norms.

932
932. § 1 . The Eucharistic celebration must be held in a sacred place, unless, in a particular case, necessity demands otherwise; In this case, the celebration must take place in a decent place.
§ 2 . The Eucharistic Sacrifice must be celebrated on a dedicated or blessed altar; Outside the sacred place, an appropriate table can be used, always using the tablecloth and corporal.

933
933. For just cause, with express permission from the local Ordinary and avoiding scandal, a priest may celebrate the Eucharist in the temple of a Church or ecclesial community that is not in full communion with the Catholic Church.

934
934. § 1 . The Holy Eucharist:
1 must be reserved in the cathedral church or equivalent to it, in all parish churches and in the church or oratory attached to the house of a religious institute or society of apostolic life;
2 can be reserved in the Bishop's chapel and, with the permission of the local Ordinary, in other churches, oratories and chapels.
§ 2 . In the sacred places where the Holy Eucharist is reserved, there must always be someone in charge and, to the extent possible, a priest will celebrate Mass there at least twice a month.

935
935. No one is permitted to keep the Holy Eucharist in his home or take it with him on trips, unless a pastoral need demands it, and observing the prescriptions dictated by the diocesan Bishop.

936
936. In the house of a religious institute or in another pious house, the most holy Eucharist must be reserved only in the church or in the main oratory attached to the house; but the Ordinary, for just cause, may allow it to also be reserved in another oratory in the same house.

937
937. The church in which the Most Holy Eucharist is reserved must be open to the faithful, at least a few hours a day, unless a serious reason obstructs, so that they can pray before the Most Holy Sacrament.

938
938. § 1 . Usually, the Holy Eucharist will be reserved in a single tabernacle of the church or oratory.
§ 2 . The tabernacle in which the Holy Eucharist is reserved must be placed in a truly noble part of the church or oratory, prominently decorated, appropriately decorated, and appropriate for prayer.
§ 3 . The tabernacle in which the Holy Eucharist is usually reserved must be immovable, made of solid non-transparent material, and closed in such a way as to avoid as much as possible the danger of desecration.
§ 4 . For serious reasons, the Holy Eucharist can be reserved in another worthy and safer place, especially during the night.
§ 5 . Whoever takes care of the church or oratory must ensure that the key of the tabernacle in which the Holy Eucharist is reserved is guarded with the greatest diligence.

939
939. The consecrated Hosts must be kept in a ciborium or container, in quantities that correspond to the needs of the faithful, and renewed frequently, duly consuming the previous ones.

940
940. Before the tabernacle in which the most holy Eucharist is reserved, a special lamp must constantly shine, with which the presence of Christ is indicated and honored.

941
941. § 1 . In churches and oratories where it is permitted to have the Holy Eucharist reserved, the exposition can be made with both the ciborium and the monstrance, complying with the norms prescribed in the liturgical books.
§ 2 . During the celebration of Mass, there is no exposition of the Blessed Sacrament in the same church or oratory.

942
942. It is advisable that in these same churches and oratories a solemn exposition of the Blessed Sacrament be made every year, lasting an adequate time, even if it is not continuous, so that the local community meditates more deeply on the Eucharistic mystery and adores it; However, this exhibition will be held only if a proportionate attendance of faithful is anticipated, and observing the established norms.

943
943. The priest or deacon is the minister of the exposition of the Blessed Sacrament and of the Eucharistic blessing; in peculiar circumstances, only for exposition and reservation, but without blessing, are the acolyte, the extraordinary minister of holy communion or another commissioned by the Ordinary of the place, observing the prescriptions dictated by the diocesan Bishop.

944
944. § 1 . As a public testimony of veneration of the Most Holy Eucharist, where it can be done at the discretion of the diocesan Bishop, there is a procession through the streets, especially on the solemnity of the Body and Blood of Christ.
§ 2 . It is up to the diocesan Bishop to give regulations on the processions, through which participation in them and their decorum are provided.

945
945. §1 . According to the approved usage of the Church, any priest who celebrates or concelebrates the Mass may receive an offering, to be applied toward a specific intention.
§ 2 . Priests are strongly encouraged to celebrate Mass for the intentions of the faithful, especially those in need, even if they do not receive any offerings.

946
946. The faithful who offer an offering so that the Mass can be applied for their intention, contribute to the good of the Church, and with it they participate in its concern to support its ministers and activities.

947
947. In matters of Mass offerings, avoid even the smallest appearance of negotiation or commerce.

948
948. A different Mass must be applied for each intention for which it has been offered and an offering has been accepted, even if it is small.

949
949. He who must celebrate and apply the Mass for the intention of those who have given offerings, remains obliged to do so, even if the offering received had perished through no fault of his own.

950
950. If an amount of money is offered for the application of Masses, without indicating how many should be celebrated, their number will be determined based on the offering set for the place where the offerer resides, unless it must be legitimately presumed that his intention was different.

951
951. § 1 . The priest who celebrates more than one Mass on the same day may apply each of them to the intention for which the offering was given; However, with the exception of Christmas Day, he should only keep the offering of one Mass, and allocate the others to the purposes determined by the Ordinary, although he may also receive some remuneration for an extrinsic title.
§ 2 . The priest who concelebrates a second Mass on the same day cannot receive an offering for it under any title.

952
952. § 1 . It is up to the provincial council or the meeting of Bishops of the province to establish by decree for the entire province the offering that must be offered for the celebration and application of the Mass, and it is not lawful for the priest to ask for a greater amount; Yes, it is licit for him to receive, through the application of a Mass, a greater offering than that established, if it is spontaneously offered, and also a lesser one.
§ 2 . In the absence of such a decree, the custom in force in the diocese will be observed.
§ 3 . Members of any religious institutes must also abide by the same decree or custom of the place mentioned in §§ 1 and 2.

953
953. It is licit for no one to accept so many offerings to celebrate Masses personally that he cannot satisfy them within a period of one year.

954
954. If in some churches or oratories orders are received for Masses in excess of those that can be said there, these may be celebrated elsewhere, unless the offerors have expressly expressed their contrary will.

955
955. § 1 . Whoever wishes to entrust to others the celebration of Masses that are to be applied, must transmit them as soon as possible to priests of his preference as long as he knows that they are trustworthy; He must deliver the entire offering received, unless he is certain that what exceeds what is established in the diocese was given in consideration to his person; and he continues to have the obligation to ensure that the Masses are celebrated, until he is satisfied with both the acceptance of the obligation and the reception of the offering.
§ 2 . The time within which Masses must be celebrated begins from the day on which the priest who is going to celebrate them received the order, unless otherwise stated.
§ 3 . Those who transmit to others Masses that are to be celebrated, write down without delay in a book, both the Masses they received and those they have commissioned from others, also noting their offerings.
§ 4 . Every priest must carefully write down the Mass orders received and those already fulfilled.

956
956. Each and every one of the administrators of pious causes, or those who in any way are obliged to ensure that Masses are celebrated, both clerics and laymen, will deliver to their Ordinaries the burdens of Masses that have not been fulfilled within the year, according to the manner determined by them.

957
957. The obligation and right to ensure that the Masses are fulfilled corresponds to the local Ordinary for the churches of the secular clergy; and to their Superiors, for the churches of religious institutes or societies of apostolic life.

958
958. § 1 . The parish priest and rector of a church or other pious place, where offerings are usually received for the celebration of Masses, must have a special book in which they will diligently take note of the number of Masses to be celebrated, the intention, the offering given and the fulfillment of the order.
§ 2 . The Ordinary has the obligation to review these books each year, personally or through others.
958. § 1, the parish priest or rector must carry and keep another in which each of the obligations, their fulfillment and alms are noted.

959
959. In the sacrament of penance, the faithful who confess their sins to a legitimate minister, repenting of them and with the purpose of amendment, obtain from God forgiveness of the sins committed after baptism, through the absolution given by the same minister, and, at the same time, they are reconciled with the Church, which they hurt by sinning.

960
960. Individual and complete confession and absolution constitute the only ordinary way with which a believer aware that he is in serious sin is reconciled with God and with the Church; Only the physical or moral impossibility excuses that confession, in which case reconciliation can also be had by other means.

961
961. § 1 . Absolution cannot be given to several penitents at the same time without prior individual and general confession unless:
1 a danger of death threatens, and the priest or priests do not have time to hear the confession of each penitent;
2 there is a serious need, that is, when, taking into account the number of penitents, there are not enough confessors to properly hear each one's confession within a reasonable time, so that the penitents, through no fault of their own, would be deprived for a considerable time of sacramental grace or holy communion; But it is not considered a sufficient necessity when confessors cannot be available simply because of a large gathering of penitents, as may happen at a great festival or pilgrimage.
§ 2 . It is up to the diocesan Bishop to judge whether the required conditions are met in accordance with § 1, 2, which, taking into account the criteria agreed with the other members of the Episcopal Conference, can determine the cases in which this need is verified.

962
962. § 1 . For a faithful person to validly receive the sacramental absolution given to several at the same time, it is required not only that he be duly prepared, but that he also proposes to make, in due time, an individual confession of all the serious sins that in the present circumstances he has not been able to confess in that way.
§ 2 . To the extent possible, also upon receipt of the general absolution, the faithful be instructed about the requirements expressed in the § 1, and before the general absolution, even in danger of death if there is time, each one is urged to make an act of contrition.

963
963. The obligation referred to in c. 989, he who is forgiven for serious sins with a general absolution, must approach individual confession as soon as possible, as soon as he has the opportunity, before receiving another general absolution, if no just cause is interposed.

964
964. § 1 . The proper place to hear confessions is a church or oratory.
§ 2 . As regards the venue for hearing confessions, the Episcopal Conference shall establish norms, ensuring in all cases that there are always in obvious places confessionals provided with grilles between the penitent and the confessor that can be freely used by the faithful who wish to do so.
§ 3 . Confessions should not be heard outside the confessional, unless it is for just cause.

965
965. Only the priest is minister of the sacrament of penance.

966
966. § 1 . To validly absolve sins, it is required that the minister, in addition to the power of order, has the power to exercise it over the faithful to whom he gives absolution.
§ 2 . The priest can receive this faculty both ipso jure and by grant from the competent authority, in accordance with c. 969.

967
967. § 1 . In addition to the Roman Pontiff, the Cardinals have ipso iure the power to hear confessions of the faithful throughout the world; and likewise the Bishops, who also exercise it licitly anywhere, unless the diocesan Bishop objects in a specific case.
§ 2 . Those who have the habitual power to hear confessions both by reason of their office and by concession of the Ordinary of the place of incardination or of the place in which they have their domicile, may exercise the same power anywhere, unless the Ordinary of some place objects in a specific case, remaining in place what is prescribed in c. 974 §§ 2 and 3.
§3 . Those who are endowed with the faculty of hearing confessions, by virtue of their office or by concession of the competent Superior in accordance with cc.
967. §2, the priest is deprived of it everywhere; If it is revoked by another local Ordinary, it is deprived of it only in the territory of the one who revokes it.
§ 3 . Any local Ordinary who revokes the faculty of hearing confessions from a priest must communicate this to the priest's own Ordinary by reason of incardination or, if it is a member of a religious institute, to his competent Superior.
§ 4 . If the faculty of hearing confessions is revoked by the proper Major Superior, the priest is deprived of it everywhere, with respect to the members of the institute; but if it is revoked by another competent Superior, he loses it only towards the subjects within the scope of his power.
967. § 2, ceases not only due to revocation, but also due to loss of office, excardination or change of address.

968
968. § 2 and 969 § 2, have ipso iure that power in any place, to confess the members and those who live day and night in the house of their institute or society; and they use this faculty also licitly, unless a major Superior objects in a specific case regarding his own subjects.
968. § 1 . Within the scope of their jurisdiction, by reason of their office, the local Ordinary, the penitentiary canon and also the parish priest and those who occupy his place have the power to confess.
§ 2 . By virtue of the office, those Superiors of a religious institute or of a society of clerical apostolic life of pontifical right who, according to the constitutions, are endowed with executive power of regime, remain the established in c.
968. § 2 is competent to grant any priests the power to hear confessions from their subjects and from those others who live day and night in the house.

969
969. § 1 . Only the local Ordinary is competent to grant the faculty of hearing confessions of any faithful to any priest; but priests who are members of a religious institute should not use it without permission, at least presumed, from their Superior.
§ 2 . The Superior of a religious institute or of a society of apostolic life referred to in c.

970
970. The power to hear confessions should only be granted to priests who have been deemed fit by an examination, or whose suitability is otherwise established.

971
971. The local Ordinary must not grant a priest the power to habitually hear confessions, even if he has a domicile or quasi-domicile within the scope of his jurisdiction, without first having heard the Ordinary of the priest, to the extent that this is possible.

972
972. The competent authority, indicated in c. 969, can grant the power to hear confessions for both an indefinite and a fixed period of time.

973
973. The power to habitually hear confessions must be granted in writing.

974
974. § 1 . The local Ordinary and the competent Superior must not revoke without serious cause the faculty to habitually hear confessions.
§ 2 . If the power to hear confessions is revoked by the Ordinary of the place that granted it, which is dealt with in c.

975
975. The power referred to in the c

976
976. Every priest, even if he lacks the power to confess, validly and licitly absolves any penitent who is in danger of death from any censures and sins, even if an approved priest is present.

977
977. Outside of danger of death, the absolution of an accomplice in a sin against the sixth commandment of the Decalogue is invalid.

978
978. § 1 . When hearing confessions, let the priest keep in mind that he acts as judge and doctor, and that he has been constituted by God as a minister of justice and at the same time of divine mercy, so that he may provide for the honor of God and the health of souls.
§ 2 . When administering the sacrament, the confessor, as a minister of the Church, must faithfully adhere to the doctrine of the Magisterium and the norms dictated by the competent authority.

979
979. When interrogating, the priest must behave with prudence and discretion, taking into account the condition and age of the penitent; and must refrain from asking about the name of the accomplice.

980
980. Absolution should not be denied or delayed if the confessor does not doubt the good disposition of the penitent and he asks to be absolved.

981
981. Depending on the severity and number of the sins, but taking into account the condition of the penitent, the confessor must impose a healthy and convenient satisfaction, which the penitent is obliged to fulfill personally.

982
982. Whoever is accused of having falsely denounced to the ecclesiastical authority an innocent confessor of the crime of soliciting a sin against the sixth commandment of the Decalogue, should not be acquitted until he formally retracts the false complaint, and is willing to repair the damage that may have been caused.

983
983. § 1 . The sacramental seal is inviolable; Therefore, the confessor is strictly prohibited from discovering the penitent, by word or in any other way, and for no reason.
§ 2 . The interpreter, if there is one, and all those who, in any way, would have become aware of the sins through confession, are also obliged to keep secret.
983. § 2 .

984
984. § 1 . The confessor is strictly prohibited from making use, to the detriment of the penitent, of the knowledge acquired in confession, even if there is no danger of revelation.
§ 2 . He who is constituted in authority cannot in any way make use, for external government, of the knowledge of sins that he has acquired by confession at any time.

985
985. The novice master and his assistant and the rector of the seminary or other educational institution must not hear sacramental confessions from their students residing in the same house, unless the students spontaneously request it in particular cases.

986
986. § 1 . All those who, by their office, are entrusted with the care of souls, are obliged to ensure that the confession of the faithful entrusted to them is heard and who reasonably request it; and that they be given the opportunity to approach individual confession, on certain days and times that are affordable to them.
§ 2 . If the need arises, every confessor is obliged to hear the confessions of the faithful; and, in danger of death, any priest.

987
987. To receive the healthy remedy of the sacrament of penance, the faithful must be so disposed that, rejecting the sins committed and having the intention of amendment, they convert to God.

988
988. § 1 . The faithful are obliged to confess according to their kind and number all serious sins committed after baptism and not yet directly forgiven by the power of the keys of the Church nor accused in individual confession, of which they are aware after a diligent examination.
§ 2 . The faithful are recommended to also confess venial sins.

989
989. Every believer who has reached the use of reason is obliged to faithfully confess his serious sins at least once a year.

990
990. Confession through an interpreter is not prohibited to anyone, as long as abuses and scandals are avoided, without prejudice to what is prescribed by the c

991
991. Every believer has the right to confess with the legitimately approved confessor of his choice, even if it is of another rite.

992
992. Indulgence is the remission before God of the temporal punishment for sins, already forgiven in terms of guilt, that a willing believer and fulfilling certain conditions, obtains through the mediation of the Church, which, as administrator of redemption, distributes and applies with authority the treasure of the satisfactions of Christ and the Saints.

993
993. The indulgence is partial or plenary, depending on whether it partially or totally releases the temporal punishment due for sins.

994
994. Every faithful can profit for himself or apply for the deceased, as a suffrage, both partial and plenary indulgences.

995
995. § 1 . In addition to the supreme authority of the Church, only those to whom the law recognizes this power, or to whom the Roman Pontiff has granted it, can only grant indulgences.
§ 2 . No authority lower than the Roman Pontiff can grant others the power to grant indulgences, unless it has been expressly granted by the Apostolic See.

996
996. § 1 . To be able to gain indulgences it is necessary to be baptized, not excommunicated, and to be in a state of grace at least at the end of the prescribed works.
§ 2 . However, for the capable subject to obtain them, he must have at least a general intention to obtain them, and complete the prescribed works within the determined time and in the proper manner, according to the tenor of the concession.

997
997. With regard to the granting and use of indulgences, the remaining prescriptions contained in the peculiar laws of the Church must also be observed.

998
998. The anointing of the sick, with which the Church commends the seriously ill faithful to the suffering and glorified Lord, so that he may relieve and save them, is administered by anointing them with oil and saying the words prescribed in the liturgical books.

999
999. In addition to the Bishop, they can bless the oil used in the anointing of the sick:
1 who by right are equal to the diocesan Bishop;
2 in case of need, any priest, but within the celebration of the sacrament.

1000
1000. § 1 . The anointings must be done carefully, with the words order and manner prescribed in the liturgical books; However, in case of need, a single anointing on the forehead, or also on another part of the body, is enough, saying the complete formula.
§ 2 . The minister must do the anointings with his hand, unless a serious reason advises the use of an instrument.

1001
1001. The shepherds of souls and the relatives of the sick must ensure that he is comforted in an opportune time with this sacrament.

1002
1002. The common celebration of the anointing of the sick for several sick people at the same time, who are duly prepared and correctly disposed, can be done in accordance with the prescriptions of the diocesan Bishop.

1003
1003. § 1 . Every priest, and only he, validly administers the anointing of the sick.
§ 2 . All priests with the care of souls have the obligation and the right to administer the anointing of the sick to the faithful entrusted to their pastoral task; but, for a reasonable cause, any other priest may administer this sacrament, with at least the presumed consent of the priest referred to above.
§ 3 . Every priest is permitted to carry the blessed oil with him, so that, in case of need, he can administer the sacrament of anointing of the sick.

1004
1004. § 1 . The anointing of the sick can be administered to the faithful who, having reached the use of reason, begins to be in danger due to illness or old age.
§ 2 . This sacrament may be repeated if the sick person, once restored to health, contracts a serious illness again, or if, during the same illness, the danger becomes more serious.

1005
1005. In doubt as to whether the sick person has reached the use of reason, suffers from a serious illness or has already died, administer this sacrament to him.

1006
1006. This sacrament must be administered to the sick who, when they were in possession of their faculties, have requested it at least implicitly.

1007
1007. Do not give the anointing of the sick to those who stubbornly persist in manifest grave sin.

1008
1008. n Through the sacrament of Orders, by divine institution, some of the faithful are constituted sacred ministers, being marked with an indelible character, and thus they are consecrated and destined to serve, according to the degree of each one, with a new and peculiar title, the people of God.
1008. Through the sacrament of Orders, by divine institution, some of the faithful are constituted sacred ministers, being marked with an indelible character, and thus they are consecrated and destined to shepherd the People of God according to the degree of each one, performing in the person of Christ the Head the functions of teaching, sanctifying and ruling.

1009
1009. § 1 . The orders are the episcopate, the presbyterate and the diaconate.
§ 2 . They are conferred by the laying on of hands and the consecratory prayer that the liturgical books prescribe for each degree.
§ 3 . n Those who have been constituted in the order of the episcopate or the presbytery receive the mission and the power to act in the person of Christ the Head; Deacons, on the other hand, are enabled to serve the people of God in the diakonia of liturgy, word and charity.
(n: Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Omnium inmentem of October 26, 2009)]:

1010
1010. Ordination must be celebrated within a solemn Mass on a Sunday or on a holy day of obligation, although for pastoral reasons it can also be done on other days, without excluding holidays.

1011
1011. § 1 . Ordination is generally to be celebrated in the cathedral; however, for pastoral reasons, it may take place in another church or oratory.
§ 2 . Clergy and other faithful should be invited to the ordination, so that they attend the celebration in the greatest number possible.

1012
1012. The consecrated Bishop is the minister of sacred ordination.

1013
1013. It is not licit for any Bishop to confer episcopal ordination without prior confirmation of the pontifical mandate.

1014
1014. Unless the Apostolic See has dispensed with it, in the episcopal consecration the main consecrating Bishop associates with him at least two other consecrating Bishops; and it is very convenient that, together with them, all the Bishops present consecrate the chosen one.

1015
1015. § 1 . Each one is ordained to the priesthood or diaconate by the Bishop himself or with legitimate resignations from the same.
§ 2 . The own Bishop, if he is not prevented for just cause, will personally ordain his subjects; but he cannot licitly ordain, without an apostolic indult, a subject of the Eastern rite.
§ 3 . Whoever can give resignations for orders can also personally confer those same orders, if he has an episcopal character.

1016
1016. With regard to the ordination of deacons of those who wish to join the secular clergy, the proper Bishop is that of the diocese in which the ordaining person resides, or that of the diocese to which he has decided to dedicate himself; for the presbyteral ordination of secular clerics, it is the Bishop of the diocese to which the ordinand is incardinated by the diaconate.
1016. and 1019, with the established liturgical rite, upon written and signed request in your own handwriting, which must also be accepted in writing by the same authority.
§ 2 . This admission rite is not obligatory for those who are incorporated by vows into a clerical institute.

1017
1017. The Bishop cannot confer orders outside the scope of his jurisdiction, except with the permission of the diocesan Bishop.

1018
1018. § 1 . You can give the resignations for seculars:
1 the proper Bishop, of which c. 1016;
2 the Apostolic Administrator and, with the consent of the College of Consultants, the Diocesan Administrator; with the consent of the council mentioned in c.

1019
1019. § 1 . It is up to the major Superior of a clerical religious institute of pontifical right or of a clerical society of apostolic life of pontifical right, for its subjects assigned according to the constitutions in a perpetual or definitive manner to the institute or society, to give resignations for the diaconate and for the priesthood.
§ 2 . The ordination of all other members of any institute or society is governed by the law of secular clerics, and any indult granted to Superiors is revoked.

1020
1020. Resignations should not be granted before having obtained all the testimonies and documents required by law, in accordance with the cc

1021
1021. Remittances may be sent to any Bishop in communion with the Apostolic See, except, except for an apostolic indult, Bishops of a rite other than that of the ordinand.

1022
1022. Once the legitimate resignations have been received, the Bishop should not ordain until his authenticity is confirmed without a doubt.

1023
1023. Resignations may be subject to limitations or be revoked by the person who issued them or by his successor; However, once given, they do not lose their effectiveness due to the loss of the right of the person who granted them.

1024
1024. Only the baptized man validly receives sacred ordination.

1025
1025. § 1 . For the lawful ordination of a priest or deacon, it is required that, after taking the tests prescribed by law, the candidate meets, in the opinion of his own Bishop or the competent major Superior, the due qualities, that he is not affected by any irregularity or impediment and that he has met the prerequisites, in accordance with cc. 1033-1039; It is also necessary to have the documents indicated in c. 1050, and that the scrutiny prescribed in c. 1051.
§ 2 . It is also required that, in the opinion of the legitimate Superior himself, it be considered useful for the ministry of the Church.
§ 3 . The Bishop who ordains his own subject assigned to the service of another diocese must be aware that the ordinand will be assigned to that diocese.

1026
1026. It is necessary that whoever is going to be ordained enjoy due freedom; It is strictly prohibited to force anyone, in any way and for any reason, to receive orders, as well as to separate one who is canonically suitable from receiving them.

1027
1027. Aspirants to the diaconate and the priesthood must be formed with careful preparation, in accordance with the law.

1028
1028. The diocesan Bishop or the competent Superior should ensure that the candidates, before receiving an order, properly know what it refers to, and the obligations it entails.

1029
1029. Only those should be ordained who, according to the prudent judgment of their own Bishop or of the competent major Superior, weighing all the circumstances, have an integral faith, are moved by right intention, possess due knowledge, enjoy a good reputation and impeccable customs, proven virtues and other physical and psychological qualities congruent with the order they are going to receive.

1030
1030. Only for a canonical cause, even if it is hidden, can the own Bishop or the competent major Superior prohibit the deacons assigned to the priesthood, his subjects, from receiving this order, leaving no recourse in accordance with the law.

1031
1031. § 1 . The priesthood should only be conferred on those who have reached the age of twenty-five and enjoy sufficient maturity, also leaving a gap of at least six months between the diaconate and the priesthood; Those destined for the priesthood can be admitted to the diaconate only after they have reached the age of twenty-three.
§ 2 . The candidate for the permanent diaconate who is not married can only be admitted to this order when he has reached at least twenty-five years of age; who is married, only after having reached at least thirty-five years of age, and with the consent of his wife.
§ 3 . Episcopal Conferences may establish norms requiring a higher age to receive the priesthood or permanent diaconate.
§ 4 . The dispensation from the required age according to §§ 1 and 2 is reserved to the Apostolic See, when the time is greater than one year.

1032
1032. § 1 . Aspirants to the priesthood can only be promoted to the diaconate after having completed the fifth year of the cycle of philosophical-theological studies.
§ 2 . After completing his studies, the deacon must take part in pastoral care, exercising the diaconal order, before receiving the priesthood, for an appropriate time to be determined by the Bishop or the competent major Superior.
§ 3 . The candidate for the permanent diaconate should not receive this order without having completed the time of his formation.

1033
1033. Only one who has received the sacrament of confirmation is licitly ordained.

1034
1034. § 1 . No aspirant to the diaconate or priesthood should receive the ordination of deacon or priest without having first been admitted as a candidate, by the authority indicated in the ccs.

1035
1035. § 1 . Before someone is promoted to the diaconate, both permanent and transitional, it is necessary that the candidate has received and has exercised for the appropriate time the ministries of reader and acolyte.
§ 2 . Between the acolyte and the diaconate there must be an interval of at least six months.

1036
1036. In order to receive the ordination of deacon or priest, the candidate must deliver to his own Bishop or to the competent major Superior a declaration written and signed in his own handwriting, in which he states that he will receive the ordination spontaneously and freely, and that he will dedicate himself perpetually to the ecclesiastical ministry, at the same time that he requests to be admitted to the order that he aspires to receive.

1037
1037. The candidate for the permanent diaconate who is not married, and the candidate for the priesthood, should not be admitted to the diaconate before they have publicly assumed, before God and before the Church, the obligation of celibacy according to the prescribed ceremony, or have taken perpetual vows in a religious institute.

1038
1038. A deacon who refuses to receive the priesthood cannot be prohibited from exercising the order received, unless he is affected by a canonical impediment or by another serious cause that must be judged by the diocesan Bishop or the competent major Superior.

1039
1039. All those who are to receive an order must do spiritual exercises, at least for five days, in the place and in the manner determined by the Ordinary; The Bishop, before proceeding with ordination, must be informed that the candidates have duly completed these exercises.

1040
1040. Those who are affected by any impediment, whether perpetual, which is called irregularity, or simple, are excluded from receiving orders; no other impediment is contracted except those enumerated in the canons that follow.

1041
1041. They are irregular to receive orders:
1 who suffers from some form of dementia or other mental illness due to which, according to the opinion of experts, he or she is incapable of correctly carrying out the ministry;
2 who has committed the crime of apostasy, heresy or schism;
3 who has attempted a marriage, even just a civil one, being prevented from contracting it, either by the marriage bond itself, or by the sacred order or by a perpetual public vow of chastity, or because he did so with a woman already united in a valid marriage or bound by that same vow;
4 who has committed voluntary manslaughter or procured abortion after it has been verified, as well as all those who have cooperated positively;
5 who intentionally and seriously mutilated himself or another, or attempted suicide;
6 who has carried out an act of power of an order reserved either to Bishops or priests, without having received that order or being prohibited from exercising it by a declared or imposed canonical penalty.

1042
1042. They are simply prevented from receiving orders:
1 the married man, unless he is legitimately assigned to the permanent diaconate;
2 who performs a position or administrative task that is prohibited to clerics under cc. 285 and 286 and must render accounts, until, having left that position or task and rendered accounts, he has been free;
3 the neophyte, unless, in the opinion of the Ordinary, it has been sufficiently proven.

1043
1043. The faithful are obliged to inform the Ordinary or the parish priest, before ordination, of any impediments to receiving orders of which they are aware.

1044
1044. § 1 . They are irregular in exercising the orders received:
1 who has received the orders illegitimately, being affected by an irregularity;
2 who has committed the crime referred to in c. 1041, 2, if the crime is public;
3 who has committed any crime mentioned in c. 1041, 3, 4, 5, 6.
§ 2 . They are prevented from exercising the orders received:
1 who has illegitimately received orders while affected by an impediment;
2 who suffers from amentia or another mental illness discussed in c. 1041, 1, until the Ordinary, having consulted an expert, allows the exercise of order.

1045
1045. Ignorance of irregularities and impediments does not exempt from them.

1046
1046. Irregularities and impediments multiply when they come from various causes; but not for repetition of the same cause, unless it is an irregularity due to voluntary homicide or for having attempted an abortion if it occurs.

1047
1047. § 1 . The dispensation of all irregularities is reserved exclusively to the Apostolic See if the fact on which they are based had been brought to judicial jurisdiction.
§ 2 . The following irregularities and impediments to receiving orders are also reserved for you:
1 of irregularity due to public crimes referred to in c. 1041, 2 and 3;
2 of irregularity due to both public and hidden crimes, to which c. 1041, 4;
3 of the impediment indicated in c. 1042, 1.
§ 3 . The dispensation of irregularities for the exercise of the received order, which is dealt with in c. 1041, 3, only in public cases, and in 4 of the same canon, also in hidden cases.
§ 4 . The Ordinary can dispense with irregularities and impediments not reserved for the Holy See.

1048
1048. In the most urgent hidden cases, if you cannot go to the Ordinary, or to the Penitentiary when dealing with the irregularities indicated in c. 1041, 3 and 4, and there is a danger of serious harm or infamy, someone who is prevented by some irregularity from exercising it can exercise an order, however, the obligation remains in place to resort as soon as possible to the Ordinary or to the Penitentiary, without indicating the name and through a confessor.

1049
1049. § 1 . In the requests to obtain dispensation from irregularities and impediments, all irregularities and all impediments must be indicated; However, the general dispensation is also valid for what has not been stated in good faith, except for the irregularities discussed in c. 1041, 4 and those others that have been brought to judicial jurisdiction, but not for what has been hidden in bad faith.
§ 2 . If it is an irregularity due to voluntary manslaughter or procured abortion, for the exemption to be valid, the number of crimes must also be stated.
§ 3 . The general exemption from irregularities and impediments to receiving orders applies to all orders.

1050
1050. and 1051.
1050. In order for someone to access sacred orders, the following documents are required:
1 the certificate of studies carried out in accordance with c. 1032;
2 in the case of the ordination of priests, the certificate that they have received the diaconate;
3 in the case of the ordination of deacons, the baptism and confirmation certificate, as well as the fact that they have received the ministries referred to in c. 1035; and also the certificate that they have made the declaration prescribed in c. 1036, and, if it is a married person who is going to be promoted to the permanent diaconate, the certificates of marriage and consent of his wife.

1051
1051. With regard to the investigation of the qualities required in the ordinand, the following prescriptions must be observed:
1 the rector of the seminary or training house must certify that the candidate possesses the necessary qualities to receive the order, that is, correct doctrine, sincere piety, good morals and aptitude to exercise the ministry; and likewise, after the appropriate investigation, he will record his state of physical and mental health;
2 so that the investigation is carried out appropriately, the diocesan Bishop or the Major Superior may use other means that seem useful, taking into account the circumstances of time and place, such as testimonial letters, proclamations or other information.

1052
1052. § 1 . In order for the Bishop who confers ordination in his own right to proceed with it, he must have proof that the documents indicated in c. 1050, and that the suitability of the candidate has been positively proven, through the investigation carried out according to law.
§ 2 . For a Bishop to ordain a foreign subject, it is enough for the resignations to attest that they have those documents, that the scrutiny has been carried out in accordance with the law, and that the suitability of the candidate is established; If the ordinand is a member of a religious institute or a society of apostolic life, the resignations must also attest that he has been received into the institute or society definitively and is a subject of the Superior who gives the resignations.
§ 3 . If, despite all this, the Bishop doubts with certain reasons the suitability of the candidate to receive orders, he should not ordain him.

1053
1053. § 1 . At the end of the ordination, the name of each ordinand and the minister who ordained him, as well as the place and day of the ordination, must be noted in a special book carefully kept in the curia of the place where the sacrament has been administered, and all documents relating to each of the ordinations must also be diligently filed.
§ 2 . The Bishop must give each ordinand an authentic certificate of the ordination received; and if these were ordained with dimissaries by a foreign Bishop, they will in turn show that document to their own Ordinary, so that the ordination can be noted in a special book that will be kept in the archive.

1054
1054. The Ordinary of the place, in the case of secular people, or the competent major Superior, in the case of his subjects, must communicate the ordination to the parish priest of the place of baptism of each ordinand, so that he can note it in the book of baptisms, in accordance with the c

1055
1055. § 1 . The marital alliance, by which the man and the woman constitute among themselves a lifelong partnership, ordered by its very natural nature to the good of the spouses and the generation and education of offspring, was elevated by Christ the Lord to the dignity of a sacrament between the baptized.
§ 2 . Therefore, between the baptized, there can be no valid marriage contract that is not therefore a sacrament.

1056
1056. The essential properties of marriage are unity and indissolubility, which in Christian marriage achieve a particular firmness due to the sacrament.

1057
1057. § 1 . Marriage is produced by the consent of the parties legitimately expressed between legally competent persons, a consent that no human power can replace.
§ 2 . Marital consent is the act of the will, by which the man and the woman give themselves and accept each other in an irrevocable alliance to constitute marriage.

1058
1058. All those to whom the law does not prohibit it may contract marriage.

1059
1059. The marriage of Catholics, even if only one of the parties is Catholic, is governed not only by divine law but also by canonical law, without prejudice to the jurisdiction of civil power over the merely civil effects of the same marriage.

1060
1060. Marriage enjoys the favor of law; Therefore, there must be doubt about the validity of the marriage until the contrary is proven.

1061
1061. § 1 A valid marriage between the baptized is called only rato, if it has not been consummated; time and consummated, if the spouses have carried out in a human way the conjugal act capable of itself to generate offspring, to which marriage is ordered by its very nature and by which the spouses become one flesh.
§ 2 . Once the marriage is celebrated, if the spouses have cohabited, consummation is presumed, until the contrary is proven.
§ 3 . An invalid marriage is called putative, if it was celebrated in good faith by at least one of the parties, until both acquire certainty of the nullity.

1062
1062. § 1 . The promise of marriage, both unilateral and bilateral, which is called betrothal, is governed by the particular law established by the Episcopal Conference, taking into account customs and civil laws, if any.
§ 2 . The promise of marriage does not give rise to an action to request its celebration; but yes for compensation for damages, if in any way it is due.

1063
1063. Pastors of souls are obliged to ensure that the ecclesiastical community itself provides the faithful with assistance so that the state of marriage is maintained in the Christian spirit and progresses towards perfection. Above all, this assistance must be provided:
1 through preaching, catechesis adapted to minors, young people and adults, and even with the media of social communication, so that the faithful acquire formation on the meaning of Christian marriage and on the task of Christian spouses and parents;
2 for personal preparation to enter into marriage, by which the bride and groom prepare themselves for the sanctity and obligations of their new state;
3 for a fruitful liturgical celebration of marriage, which shows that the spouses are a sign of the mystery of unity and fruitful love between Christ and the Church and that they participate in it;
4 for the help given to married people, so that, faithfully maintaining and defending the marital alliance, they may reach an increasingly holy and fuller life within their own family.

1064
1064. It is the responsibility of the local Ordinary to ensure that this assistance is properly organized, also hearing, if it seems appropriate, men and women of proven experience and competence.

1065
1065. § 1 . Catholics not yet confirmed must receive the sacrament of confirmation before being admitted to marriage, if this is possible without serious difficulty.
§ 2 . In order to fruitfully receive the sacrament of marriage, it is strongly recommended that the couple attend the sacraments of penance and the most holy Eucharist.

1066
1066. Before the marriage is celebrated, it must be established that nothing opposes its valid and lawful celebration.

1067
1067. The Episcopal Conference will establish norms on the examination of the couple, as well as on marriage proclamations or other appropriate means to carry out the investigations that must necessarily precede the marriage, so that, diligently observed, the parish priest can attend the marriage.

1068
1068. In danger of death, if no other evidence can be obtained, unless there is evidence to the contrary, the declaration of the couple, under oath as the case may be, that they are baptized and free of all impediments is sufficient.

1069
1069. All the faithful are obliged to inform the parish priest or the local Ordinary, before the celebration of the marriage, of any impediments of which they are aware.

1070
1070. If the investigations are carried out by someone other than the parish priest who is responsible for assisting the marriage, they will communicate their results to the same parish priest as soon as possible, by means of an authentic document.

1071
1071. § 1 . Except in case of necessity, no one should attend without permission from the local Ordinary:
1 to the marriage of the lazy;
2 to a marriage that cannot be recognized or celebrated according to civil law;
3 to the marriage of someone who is subject to natural obligations arising from a previous union, towards the other party or towards the children of that union;
4 to the marriage of someone who had clearly abandoned the Catholic faith;
5 to the marriage of someone who is subject to censure;
6 to the marriage of a minor, if his parents ignore it or reasonably oppose it;
7 to marriage by attorney, which is discussed in c. 1105.
§ 2 . The local Ordinary must not grant permission to attend the marriage of someone who has notoriously abandoned the Catholic faith, if it is not observing with due adaptations what is established in c. 1125.

1072
1072. Pastors of souls should try to discourage young people from celebrating marriage who have not yet reached the age at which, according to the customs of the region, it is usually contracted.

1073
1073. Dimitory impediment disqualifies the person from validly contracting marriage.

1074
1074. The impediment that can be proven in the external forum is considered public; Otherwise it is hidden.

1075
1075. § 1 . It is the exclusive responsibility of the supreme authority of the Church to authentically declare when divine law prohibits or resolves marriage.
§ 2 . Likewise, only the supreme authority has the right to establish other impediments regarding the baptized.

1076
1076. Any custom that introduces a new impediment or is contrary to existing impediments is condemned.

1077
1077. § 1 . In a particular case, the local Ordinary may prohibit marriage to his own subjects wherever they reside and to all those who actually reside within his territory, but only temporarily, for serious reasons and for as long as it lasts.
§ 2 . Only the supreme authority of the Church can add a deciding clause to this prohibition.

1078
1078. § 1 . With the exception of those impediments whose dispensation is reserved for the Apostolic See, the local Ordinary can dispense from all impediments of ecclesiastical law to his own subjects, regardless of the place in which they reside, and to all those who actually live in his territory.
§ 2 . The impediments whose dispensation is reserved for the Apostolic See are:
1 the impediment that comes from having received sacred orders or the perpetual public vow of chastity in a religious institute of pontifical right;
2 the impediment of crime, which is discussed in c. 1090.
§ 3 . Dispensation from the impediment of consanguinity is never granted in a straight line or in the second degree of a collateral line.
1078. § 2, 1, the local Ordinary and, provided the case is hidden, all those mentioned in c. 1079 §§ 2 and 3, observing the conditions prescribed therein.
§ 2 . This power also applies to validating a marriage, if there is the same danger in delay and there is no time to resort to the Apostolic See, or to the local Ordinary when dealing with impediments from which it can dispense.
1078. § 2 , or it is an impediment of positive natural or divine law that has already ceased.

1079
1079. § 1 . In danger of death, the Ordinary of the place can exempt his own subjects, wherever they reside, and all those who actually live in his territory, both from the manner that must be observed in the celebration of marriage and from each and every one of the impediments of ecclesiastical law, whether public or hidden, except for the impediment arising from the sacred order of the presbyterate.
§ 2 . In the same circumstances as those discussed in § 1, but only for cases in which it is not even possible to go to the local Ordinary, the parish priest, the duly delegated sacred minister and the priest or deacon who attend the marriage referred to in c.
1079. §2, they must immediately communicate to the local Ordinary the dispensation granted for the external forum; and this must be noted in the marriage book.

1080
1080. § 1 . Provided that the impediment is discovered when everything is already prepared for the nuptials, and the marriage cannot be delayed without danger of serious harm until dispensation is obtained from the competent authority, they enjoy the power to dispense with all impediments, except those listed in the c

1081
1081. Both the parish priest and the priest or the deacon, to whom the c

1082
1082. Unless the rescript of the Penitentiary determines otherwise, the dispensation of a hidden impediment granted in the non-sacramental internal forum will be noted in the book that must be kept in the secret archive of the curia; and no further dispensation is necessary for the external forum, if the hidden impediment later becomes public.

1083
1083. § 1 . A man cannot contract a valid marriage before he is sixteen years old, nor a woman before she is fourteen years old.
§ 2 . The Episcopal Conference may establish a higher age for the licit celebration of marriage.

1084
1084. § 1 . The antecedent and perpetual impotence to carry out the marital act, both on the part of the man and the woman, whether absolute or relative, renders marriage null and void by its very nature.
§ 2 . If the impediment of impotence is doubtful, with doubt of law or fact, the marriage should not be prevented or, while the doubt persists, declared void.
§ 3 . Sterility does not prohibit or resolve marriage, without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 1098.

1085
1085. § 1 . A person who is bound by the bond of a previous marriage, even if it has not been consummated, invalidly attempts a marriage.
§ 2 . Even if the previous marriage is void or has been dissolved for any reason, it is not licit to contract another one before the nullity or dissolution of the previous one is legitimately and certainly established.

1086
1086. § 1 . n A marriage between two people, one of whom was baptized in the Catholic Church or received into its bosom, and the other who was not baptized, is invalid.
§ 2 . This impediment will not be waived if the conditions indicated in ccs are not met. 1125 and 1126.
§ 3 . If at the time of contracting the marriage, one party was commonly considered baptized or his or her baptism was doubtful, it must be presumed, in accordance with c. 1060, the validity of the marriage until it is proven with certainty that one of the parties was baptized and the other was not.
1086. § 1 . A marriage between two people is invalid, one of whom was baptized in the Catholic Church or received into its bosom and has not separated from it by a formal act, and the other who is not baptized.

1087
1087. Those who have received sacred orders invalidly attempt marriage.

1088
1088. Those who are bound by a perpetual public vow of chastity in a religious institute invalidly attempt marriage.

1089
1089. There can be no marriage between a man and a woman kidnapped or at least held with a view to marrying her, unless later the woman, separated from the kidnapper and finding herself in a safe and free place, voluntarily chooses marriage.

1090
1090. § 1 . Whoever, in order to marry a specific person, causes the death of that person's spouse or his own spouse, invalidly attempts that marriage.
§ 2 . Those who, with mutual cooperation, physical or moral, caused the death of the spouse, also invalidly attempt the marriage of each other.

1091
1091. § 1 . In a straight line of consanguinity, marriage between all ascendants and descendants, both legitimate and natural, is void.
§ 2 . In the collateral line, it is void up to and including the fourth degree.
§ 3 . The consanguinity impediment does not multiply.
§ 4 . Marriage should never be permitted when there remains any doubt as to whether the parties are consanguineous in some degree of direct line or in the second degree of collateral line.

1092
1092. Affinity in a straight line settles marriage to any degree.

1093
1093. The impediment of public honesty arises from an invalid marriage after life in common has been established or from notorious or public concubinage; and settles marriage in the first degree of a straight line between the man and the woman's blood relatives and vice versa.

1094
1094. Those who are united by legal kinship arising from adoption, in a direct line or in the second degree of a collateral line, cannot validly contract marriage with each other.
(n: Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Omnium inmentem of October 26, 2009)]:

1095
1095. The following are incapable of marriage:
1 those who lack sufficient use of reason;
2 who have a serious defect of discretion of judgment regarding the essential rights and duties of marriage that they must mutually give and accept;
3 who cannot assume the essential obligations of marriage for reasons of a psychological nature.

1096
1096. § 1 . In order for there to be marital consent, it is necessary that the parties not ignore at least that marriage is a permanent partnership between a man and a woman, ordered to the procreation of offspring through a certain sexual cooperation.
§ 2 . This ignorance is not presumed after puberty.

1097
1097. § 1 . The mistake about the person makes the marriage invalid.
§ 2 . The error regarding a quality of the person, even if it is the cause of the contract, does not settle the marriage, unless this quality is directly and primarily intended.

1098
1098. Whoever contracts the marriage deceived by fraud, provoked to obtain his consent, regarding a quality of the other contracting party, which by its nature can seriously disturb the consortium of conjugal life, contracts invalidly.

1099
1099. The error regarding the unity, indissolubility or sacramental dignity of marriage, as long as it does not determine the will, does not vitiate marital consent.

1100
1100. Certainty or opinion about the nullity of marriage does not necessarily exclude marital consent.

1101
1101. § 1 . The internal consent of the will is presumed to be in accordance with the words or signs used when celebrating the marriage.
§ 2 . But if one or both contracting parties exclude with a positive act of will the marriage itself, or an essential element of the marriage, or an essential property, they contract invalidly.

1102
1102. § 1 . Marriage cannot be validly contracted under a future condition.
§ 2 . A marriage contracted under a condition of past or present is valid or not, depending on whether what is the object of the condition is verified or not.
§ 3 . However, the condition addressed in § 2 cannot be lawfully placed without written permission from the local Ordinary.

1103
1103. A marriage contracted by violence or serious fear arising from an external cause is invalid, even that not inferred with a view to marriage, to escape from which someone is forced to marry.

1104
1104. § 1 . To validly contract a marriage it is necessary that both parties are present in the same place, either in person or through a solicitor.
§ 2 . Let the spouses express marital consent in words; or, if they cannot speak, with equivalent signs.

1105
1105. § 1 . To validly contract a marriage by proxy, it is required:
1 that a special mandate has been given to contract with a specific person;
2 that the attorney has been appointed by the principal, and personally performs that function.
§ 2 . For the mandate to be valid, it is required that it be signed by the principal and, in addition, by the parish priest or the Ordinary of the place where the mandate is given, or by a priest delegated by one of them, or at least by two witnesses; or it must be done through an authentic document in accordance with civil law.
§ 3 . If the principal cannot write, this circumstance must be stated in the mandate, and another witness will be added, who must also sign the writing; Otherwise, the mandate is void.
§ 4 . If the principal, before the attorney has contracted in his name, revokes the mandate or falls into amencia, the marriage is invalid, even if the attorney or the other contracting party is unaware of it.

1106
1106. Marriage can be contracted through an interpreter, but the parish priest must not attend if he is not satisfied with the fidelity of the interpreter.

1107
1107. Even if the marriage had been contracted invalidly due to an impediment or defect of form, it is presumed that the consent given perseveres, as long as its revocation is not recorded.

1108
1108. § 1 . Only those marriages are valid that are contracted before the local Ordinary or the parish priest, or a priest or deacon delegated by one of them to attend, and before two witnesses, in accordance with the rules established in the canons that follow, and leaving aside the exceptions discussed in the ccs. 144,
1108. § 3 .
§ 2 . For the delegation of the power to attend marriages to be valid, it must be expressly granted to specific people; If it is a special delegation, it must be given for a specific marriage, and if it is a general delegation, it must be granted in writing.
1108. § 3 .
§ 2 . A suitable layman must be chosen, capable of instructing the couple and capable of properly celebrating the marriage liturgy.

1109
1109. n The local Ordinary and the parish priest, unless by sentence or decree they were excommunicated, or interdicted, or suspended from the office, or declared such, by virtue of the office validly assist in their territory at the marriages not only of the subjects, but also of those who are not subjects, provided that at least one of the parties is attached to the Latin Church.
1109. The local Ordinary and the parish priest, unless by sentence or decree they were excommunicated, or interdicted, or suspended from the office, or declared as such, by virtue of the office, validly assist in their territory at the marriages not only of the subjects, but also of those who are not subjects, as long as one of them is of the Latin rite.

1110
1110. The Ordinary and the personal parish priest, by reason of their office, only validly assist at the marriage of those of whom at least one is their subject, within the limits of their jurisdiction.

1111
1111. § 1 .
1111. § 1 . n The local Ordinary and the parish priest, while validly carrying out their office, may delegate to priests and deacons the faculty, even general, of assisting at marriages within the limits of their territory, remaining firm, however, as prescribed by the c
1111. § 1 . The local Ordinary and the parish priest, while validly carrying out their office, may delegate to priests and deacons the power, even general, to assist at marriages within the limits of their territory.

1112
1112. § 1, 1116 and 1127 §§ 1 and 2.
§ 2 . It is understood that only those who, being present, request the manifestation of the consent of the spouses and receive it in the name of the Church, attend the marriage.
§ 3 . n Only the priest validly assists the marriage between two oriental parties or between a Latin party and a Catholic or non-Catholic oriental party
1112. § 1 . n Where there are no priests or deacons, the diocesan Bishop, with prior favorable vote of the Episcopal Conference and obtaining license from the Holy See, may delegate lay people to attend marriages, remaining firm as established in the c
1112. § 1 . Where there are no priests or deacons, the diocesan Bishop, with prior favorable vote of the Episcopal Conference and obtaining license from the Holy See, may delegate lay people to attend marriages.

1113
1113. Before granting a special delegation, everything established by law must be complied with to verify the state of freedom.

1114
1114. Whoever attends the marriage acts illicitly if he is not aware of the state of freedom of the couple under the law and if, each time he attends by virtue of a general delegation, he does not ask the priest for permission, when possible.

1115
1115. Marriages must be celebrated in the parish where one of the spouses has his domicile or quasi-domicile or has resided for a month, or, if they are vagrants, in the parish where they are at that time; With the permission of the proper Ordinary or the proper parish priest, they can be celebrated elsewhere.

1116
1116. § 3 . In danger of death, the confessor enjoys the power to dispense internally from hidden impediments, both in sacramental confession and outside of it.
§ 4 . In the case discussed in § 2, it is considered that it is not possible to go to the local Ordinary if it can only be done by telegraph or telephone.
1116. § 1 . If there is no one who is competent according to the law to attend the marriage, or it cannot be attended without serious difficulty, those who intend to contract a true marriage can do so validly and lawfully with only the witnesses present:
1 in danger of death;
2 out of danger of death, as long as it is prudently anticipated that this situation will last for a month.
§ 2 . In both cases, if there is another priest or deacon who can be present, he must be called and must witness the marriage together with the witnesses, without prejudice to the validity of the marriage only before witnesses.
§ 3 . n Under the same circumstances listed in § 1 nn. 1 and 2, the local Ordinary may grant any Catholic priest the power to bless the marriage of faithful of the Eastern Churches who do not have full communion with the Catholic Church, if they spontaneously request it, and as long as nothing opposes the valid and lawful celebration of the marriage. The priest himself, if he can prudently do so, will communicate it to the interested competent authority of the non-Catholic Church.

1117
1117. n The above established form must be observed if at least one of the contracting parties was baptized in the Catholic Church or received into it, without prejudice to what is established in the c
1117. [Original wording of the canon
1117. modified by His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Omnium inmentem of October 26, 2009)]:
1117. The above established form must be observed if at least one of the contracting parties was baptized in the Catholic Church or received into it and has not departed from it by a formal act, without prejudice to what is established in the c

1118
1118. § 1 . Marriage between Catholics or between a Catholic party and a baptized non-Catholic party must be celebrated in a parish church; With the permission of the local Ordinary or the parish priest, it can be celebrated in another church or oratory.
§ 2 . The local Ordinary may allow the celebration of the marriage in another convenient place.
§ 3 . The marriage between a Catholic party and a non-baptized party may be celebrated in a church or other convenient place.

1119
1119. Except in cases of necessity, in the celebration of marriage the rites prescribed in the liturgical books approved by the Church or introduced by legitimate customs must be observed.

1120
1120. With the recognition of the Holy See, the Episcopal Conference can develop its own rite of marriage, consistent with the customs of places and peoples, adapted to the Christian spirit; The law remains in place, however, according to which whoever attends the marriage while being personally present must ask for and receive the expression of the consent of the spouses.

1121
1121. § 1 . After the marriage has been celebrated, the parish priest of the place where it was celebrated or whoever takes his place, even if none of them attended the marriage, must record as soon as possible in the marriage registry the names of the spouses, the assistant and the witnesses, and the place and day of the celebration, according to the manner prescribed by the Episcopal Conference or by the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . When marriage is contracted as provided in c. 1116, the priest or deacon, if he was present at the celebration, or otherwise the witnesses, are obligated jointly with the bride and groom to communicate as soon as possible to the parish priest or the Ordinary of the place that the marriage has been celebrated.
§ 3 . As regards a marriage contracted with a dispensation from the canonical form, the Ordinary of the place that granted the dispensation must ensure that the dispensation and celebration are noted in the registry of marriages, both of the curia and of the parish of the Catholic part, whose parish priest carried out the investigations regarding the state of freedom; The Catholic spouse is obliged to notify the same Ordinary and the parish priest as soon as possible that the marriage has been celebrated, also stating the place where it was contracted, and the public form that has been observed.

1122
1122. § 1 . The marriage must also be noted in the baptism records in which the baptism of the spouses is recorded.
§ 2 . If a spouse has not contracted a marriage in the parish in which he or she was baptized, the priest of the place where the marriage was celebrated must send notification of the contracted marriage as soon as possible to the parish priest of the place where the baptism was administered.

1123
1123. When a marriage is validated for the external forum, or is declared null, or is legitimately dissolved for a cause other than death, this circumstance must be communicated to the parish priest of the place where the marriage was celebrated, so that the annotation in the marriage and baptism records can be made as ordered.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio De concordia inter Codices, dated May 31, 2016)]:

1124
1124. n Marriage between two baptized persons, one of whom has been baptized in the Catholic Church or received into it after baptism, and another attached to a Church or ecclesial community that is not in full communion with the Catholic Church, is prohibited without express license from the competent authority.
1124. Marriage between two baptized persons is prohibited, without express license from the competent authority, one of whom has been baptized in the Catholic Church or received into it after baptism and has not separated from it by a formal act, and another attached to a Church or ecclesial community that is not in full communion with the Catholic Church.
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio De concordia inter Codices, dated May 31, 2016)]:

1125
1125. If there is a just and reasonable cause, the local Ordinary can grant this license; but it should not be granted if the following conditions are not met:
1 that the Catholic party declare that it is willing to avoid any danger of departing from the faith, and sincerely promise that it will do everything possible to ensure that all children are baptized and educated in the Catholic Church;
2 that the other contracting party be informed at the time about the promises that the Catholic party must make, so that it is clear that he is truly aware of the promise and the obligation of the Catholic party;
3 that both parties be instructed about the essential purposes and properties of marriage, which cannot be excluded by either of them.

1126
1126. It is up to the Episcopal Conference to determine both the way in which these declarations and promises, which are always necessary, are to be made, as well as the way in which they are recorded in the external forum and that the non-Catholic party is informed.

1127
1127. § 2 .
1127. § 1 . n Regarding the form that must be used in mixed marriage, the prescriptions of c. 1108; but if a Catholic party contracts marriage with a non-Catholic party of the Eastern rite, the canonical form is required only for legality; but for validity the intervention of a priest is required, observing the other prescriptions of the law.
§ 2 . If there are serious difficulties in observing the canonical form, the Ordinary of the place of the Catholic part has the right to dispense from it in each case, but consulting the Ordinary of the place where the marriage is celebrated and the requirement of some public form of celebration remains for validity; It is up to the Episcopal Conference to establish norms so that said dispensation is granted with unity of criteria.
§ 3 . It is prohibited that, before or after the canonical celebration in accordance with § 1, there is another religious celebration of the same marriage to grant or renew marital consent; Likewise, a religious ceremony should not be held in which the Catholic assistant and the non-Catholic minister together, each performing their own rite, ask for the consent of the couple.
1127. and 1128 also apply to marriages for which the impediment of disparity of cults is an obstacle, which is dealt with in c. 1086 § 1 .
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canon modified by His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Omnium inmentem of October 26, 2009)]:
1127. § 1 . Regarding the form that should be used in mixed marriage, the prescriptions of c. 1108; but if a Catholic party contracts marriage with a non-Catholic party of the Eastern rite, the canonical form is required only for legality; but for validity the intervention of a sacred minister is required, observing the other prescriptions of the law.
1127. § 2 . If the impediment cannot be proven, it is sufficient for the consent to be renewed privately and secretly by the contracting party who knows of the existence of the impediment, as long as the other party perseveres in the consent he gave; or by both contracting parties, if both know of the existence of the impediment.

1128
1128. The local Ordinaries and the other pastors of souls must ensure that the Catholic spouse, and the children born in a mixed marriage, do not lack spiritual assistance to fulfill their obligations and must help the spouses to promote the unity of their conjugal and family life.

1129
1129. The prescriptions of the cc

1130
1130. For serious and urgent reasons, the local Ordinary may allow the marriage to be celebrated in secret.

1131
1131. Permission to celebrate marriage in secret entails:
1 that the investigations that must be made before marriage be carried out in secret;
2 that the local Ordinary, the assistant, the witnesses and the spouses keep the marriage celebrated secret.

1132
1132. The obligation to maintain secrecy, which is discussed in c. 1131, 2, if due to the observance of the secret there is an imminent danger of serious scandal or serious injury to the sanctity of the marriage, and the parties must be warned of this before the celebration of the marriage.

1133
1133. A marriage celebrated in secret will be recorded only in a special register, which must be kept in the secret archive of the curia.

1134
1134. A valid marriage creates a perpetual and exclusive bond between the spouses by its very nature; Furthermore, in Christian marriage the spouses are strengthened and remain as if consecrated by a sacrament peculiar to the duties and dignity of their state.

1135
1135. Both spouses have equal obligation and right regarding everything that belongs to the consortium of married life.

1136
1136. Parents have the very serious obligation and the primary right to take care, to the best of their ability, of the education of their children, both physically, socially and culturally, as well as morally and religiously.

1137
1137. Children conceived or born from a valid or putative marriage are legitimate.

1138
1138. § 1 . Marriage shows who the father is, unless the contrary is proven with obvious reasons.
§ 2 . Children born at least 180 days after the marriage was celebrated, or within 300 days from the dissolution of marital life, are presumed legitimate.

1139
1139. Illegitimate children are legitimized by the subsequent marriage of the parents, both valid and putative, or by rescript of the Holy See.

1140
1140. As far as canonical effects are concerned, legitimized children are equal in everything to legitimate ones, unless the law expressly provides otherwise.

1141
1141. A long and consummated marriage cannot be dissolved by any human power, nor by any cause other than death.

1142
1142. An unconsummated marriage between the baptized, or between the baptized party and the unbaptized party, may be dissolved with just cause by the Roman Pontiff, at the request of both parties or one of them, even if the other objects.

1143
1143. § 1 . The marriage contracted by two unbaptized persons is dissolved by the Pauline privilege in favor of the faith of the party who has received the baptism, by the very fact that this party contracts a new marriage, provided that the unbaptized party separates.
§ 2 . The unbaptized party is considered to separate if he does not want to cohabit with the baptized party, or to cohabit peacefully without offending the Creator, unless the latter, after receiving baptism, had given him a just reason to separate.

1144
1144. § 1 . For the baptized party to validly contract a new marriage, the unbaptized party must always be questioned:
1 if she also wants to receive baptism;
2 if you want to at least cohabit peacefully with the baptized party, without offending the Creator.
§ 2 . This interpellation must be done after baptism; However, with serious cause, the local Ordinary may allow it to be done earlier, and even dispense from it, both before and after baptism, as long as it is established, at least by a summary and extrajudicial procedure, that it could not be done or that it would have been useless.

1145
1145. § 1 . The interpellation will normally be made by the authority of the Ordinary of the place of the converted party; This Ordinary must grant the other spouse, if he or she requests it, a period of time to respond, however, warning him or her that, if this period has passed unnecessarily, his silence will be understood as a negative response.
§ 2 . If the above-mentioned form cannot be observed, the interpellation made, even privately, by the converted party is valid and also lawful.
§ 3 . In the two previous cases, it must legitimately be stated in the external forum that the interpellation has been made and what its result has been.

1146
1146. The baptized party has the right to contract a new marriage with another Catholic person:
1 if the other party responds negatively to the interpellation, or if it was not legitimately made;
2 if the unbaptized party, questioned or not, having continued peaceful cohabitation without offense to the Creator, later separates without just cause, remaining in place what is prescribed in cc. 1144 and 1145.

1147
1147. However, for serious reasons, the local Ordinary may grant that the baptized party, using the Pauline privilege, contract marriage with a non-Catholic party, baptized or not, also observing the prescriptions of the canons on mixed marriages.

1148
1148. § 1 . Upon receiving baptism in the Catholic Church, an unbaptized man who simultaneously has several unbaptized wives, if it is difficult for him to remain with the first of them, he can stay with one of the others, putting the others away from him. The same applies to an unbaptized woman who simultaneously has several unbaptized husbands.
§ 2 . In the cases dealt with by § 1, the marriage must be contracted according to the legitimate form, once baptism has been received, also observing, if applicable, the prescriptions on mixed marriages and other provisions of the law.
§ 3 . Taking into account the moral, social and economic condition of places and people, the Ordinary of the place must ensure that, according to the norms of justice, Christian charity and natural equity, the needs of the first woman and the others who have been separated are sufficiently provided for.

1149
1149. The unbaptized person who, once received baptism in the Catholic Church, is unable to reestablish cohabitation with the other unbaptized spouse due to captivity or persecution, may contract a new marriage, even if the other party has received baptism in the meantime, remaining in force what is prescribed in c. 1141.

1150
1150. In case of doubt, the privilege of faith enjoys the favor of law.

1151
1151. Spouses have the duty and right to maintain conjugal coexistence, unless they are excused by a legitimate cause.

1152
1152. § 1 . Although it is strongly recommended that the spouse, moved by Christian charity and keeping in mind the good of the family, does not deny forgiveness to the adulterous partner or interrupt married life, if in spite of everything he does not expressly or tacitly forgive that fault, he has the right to break the marital coexistence, unless he had consented to the adultery, or had been the cause of it, or he had also committed adultery.
§ 2 . There is tacit condonation if the innocent spouse, after having ascertained the adultery, spontaneously continues in the marital relationship with the other spouse; Condonation is presumed if marital cohabitation continues for six months, without having resorted to ecclesiastical or civil authority.
§ 3 . If the innocent spouse interrupts conjugal coexistence of his own will, he must propose within six months a cause for separation before the competent ecclesiastical authority, which, weighing all the circumstances, must consider whether it is possible to move the innocent spouse to forgive the guilt and not separate forever.

1153
1153. § 1 . If one of the spouses puts the other or the children in serious spiritual or physical danger, or otherwise makes life together too difficult, he or she provides the other with a legitimate reason to separate, with the authorization of the local Ordinary and, if the delay implies a danger, also by his own authority.
§ 2 . When the cause of separation ceases, conjugal coexistence must always be restored, unless the ecclesiastical authority determines otherwise.

1154
1154. Once the separation of the spouses has been carried out, the proper support and education of the children must always be provided in a timely manner.

1155
1155. The innocent spouse can admit the other back to married life, and it is to be praised that he does so; and in that case, you waive the right to separate.

1156
1156. § 1 . To validate a marriage that is void due to a decisive impediment, it is necessary that the impediment cease or a dispensation from it be obtained, and that consent be renewed by at least the spouse who knew of the existence of the impediment.
§ 2 . This renewal is required by ecclesiastical law for the validity of the convalidation, even if both parties had given their consent from the first moment and had not subsequently revoked it.

1157
1157. The renewal of consent must be a new act of will regarding the marriage by the person who knows or believes that it was null from the beginning.

1158
1158. § 1 . If the impediment is public, both contracting parties must renew the consent in the canonical form, leaving aside what is prescribed by the c

1159
1159. § 1 . A marriage void due to lack of consent is validated if the person who had not previously consented consents, as long as the consent given by the other party persists.
§ 2 . If the lack of consent cannot be proven, it is sufficient for the person who had not given it to privately and secretly give consent.
§ 3 . If the lack of consent can be proven, it is necessary that consent be given in canonical form.

1160
1160. For a marriage void due to a defect of form to be made valid, it must be contracted again in canonical form, without prejudice to what is prescribed by the c

1161
1161. § 1 . The healing at the root of a void marriage is its validation, without the consent having to be renewed, granted by the competent authority; and it carries with it the dispensation of the impediment, if there is one, and of the canonical form, if it was not observed, as well as the retrotraction of the canonical effects to the past.
§ 2 . Convalidation takes place from the moment the grace is granted; and it is understood that the retrotraction extends to the moment in which the marriage was celebrated, unless otherwise expressly stated.
§ 3 . Healing at the root should only be granted when it is probable that the parties want to persevere in married life.

1162
1162. § 1 . If consent is lacking in both parties or in one of them, the marriage cannot be healed at the root, whether the consent was lacking from the beginning, or if it was given in the first moment and was later revoked.
§ 2 . If consent was lacking at the beginning, but was given later, healing may be granted from the moment consent was given.

1164
1164. Healing can also be granted if one or both parties ignore it; but it should not be granted without serious cause.

1165
1165. § 1 . Healing at the root can be granted by the Apostolic See.
§ 2 . It can be granted by the diocesan Bishop in each case, even when several grounds for annulment occur in the same marriage, meeting the conditions established in c. 1125 for the healing of mixed marriages; but the Bishop cannot grant it if there is an impediment whose dispensation is reserved to the Apostolic See in accordance with c.

1166
1166. Sacramentals are sacred signs, by which, in a certain way imitating the sacraments, mainly spiritual effects are signified and obtained through the intercession of the Church.

1167
1167. § 1 . Only the Apostolic See can establish new sacramentals, authentically interpret those that exist and suppress or modify any of them.
§ 2 . In the preparation or administration of sacramentals, the rites and formulas approved by the authority of the Church must be diligently observed.

1169
1169. § 1 . Consecrations and dedications can validly be carried out by those who enjoy episcopal character, and also by those priests who are permitted to do so by law or by legitimate concession.
§ 2 . Any priest can impart blessings, except those reserved for the Roman Pontiff or Bishops.
§ 3 . The deacon can only impart those blessings that are expressly permitted by law.

1170
1170. Blessings must be imparted first to Catholics, but they can also be given to catechumens and even to non-Catholics, unless a Church prohibition obstructs.

1171
1171. Sacred things destined for worship must be treated with reverence through dedication or blessing, and they must not be used for profane or improper use, even if they belong to individuals.

1172
1172. § 1 . Without a peculiar and express license from the local Ordinary, no one can legitimately perform exorcisms on the possessed.
§ 2 . The local Ordinary will grant this license only to a pious, learned, prudent priest with integrity of life.

1173
1173. The Church, exercising the priestly function of Christ, celebrates the Liturgy of the Hours, by which, hearing God speaking to his people and remembering the mystery of salvation, it praises him without ceasing with song and prayer while at the same time praying for the salvation of the whole world.

1174
1174. § 1 . The obligation to celebrate the liturgy of the hours binds clerics according to the norm of the c

1175
1175. When celebrating the liturgy of the hours, efforts must be made to observe the natural course of each hour as far as possible.

1176
1176. § 1 . The faithful deceased must have ecclesiastical funerals in accordance with the law.
§ 2 . Ecclesiastical funerals, with which the Church obtains spiritual help for the deceased and honors their bodies, and at the same time provides the living with the consolation of hope, must be celebrated according to liturgical laws.
§ 3 . The Church strongly advises that the pious custom of burying the corpse of the deceased be preserved; However, it does not prohibit cremation, unless it has been chosen for reasons contrary to Christian doctrine.

1177
1177. § 1 . Funerals for a faithful deceased should generally be celebrated in their own parish church.
§ 2 . However, all the faithful, or those whose responsibility it is to arrange for the funeral of a deceased faithful, are allowed to choose another church for the funeral, with the consent of the person who governs it and having communicated it to the deceased's own parish priest.
§ 3 . If the death takes place outside the parish and the body has not been transferred there nor has a church been legitimately chosen for the funeral, the funeral will be celebrated in the church of the parish where the death occurred, unless the particular law designates another.

1178
1178. The funeral of the diocesan Bishop will be celebrated in his cathedral church, unless he has chosen another.

1179
1179. The funerals of religious or members of societies of apostolic life will generally be celebrated in the church or oratory itself by the Superior, if the institute or society is clerical; or by the chaplain in other cases.

1180
1180. § 1 . If the parish has its own cemetery, the faithful must be buried there, unless the deceased himself or those whose responsibility it is to take care of his grave have legitimately chosen another cemetery.
§ 2 . Unless the law prohibits it, everyone can choose the cemetery in which they are to be buried.

1181
1181. As regards oblations on the occasion of funerals, observe the prescriptions of c. 1264, avoiding however any respect of persons, or that the poor are deprived of the proper funerals.

1182
1182. Once the burial is completed, the due entry must be made in the book of the deceased in accordance with particular law.

1183
1183. § 1 . As far as funerals are concerned, catechumens are equated with the faithful.
§ 2 . The local Ordinary may allow ecclesiastical funerals to be celebrated for those children whose parents wanted to be baptized, but died before receiving baptism.
§ 3 . According to the prudent judgment of the local Ordinary, ecclesiastical funerals may be granted to the baptized who were attached to a non-Catholic Church or ecclesial community, as long as their contrary will is not stated, and their own minister cannot perform them.

1184
1184. § 1 . Ecclesiastical funerals are to be denied, unless before death they had given some sign of repentance:
1 to those notoriously apostates, heretics or schismatics;
2 to those who requested the cremation of his body for reasons contrary to the Christian faith;
3 to the other manifest sinners, to whom ecclesiastical funerals cannot be granted without public scandal among the faithful.
§ 2 . In the event that any doubt arises, you must consult the local Ordinary and abide by his provisions.

1185
1185. Anyone who has been excluded from ecclesiastical funerals will also be denied any funeral Mass.

1186
1186. In order to promote the sanctification of the people of God, the Church recommends to the peculiar and filial veneration of the faithful the Blessed always Virgin Mary, Mother of God, whom Christ constituted Mother of all men; It also promotes the true and authentic worship of the other Saints, with whose example the faithful are edified and with whose intercession they are protected.

1187
1187. It is only licit to venerate with public worship those servants of God who have been included by the authority of the Church in the catalog of Saints or Blesseds.

1188
1188. The use of exposing sacred images in churches for the veneration of the faithful must be firmly preserved; but it must be done in moderate numbers and in proper order, so that they do not cause surprise among the Christian people or give rise to a deviant devotion.

1189
1189. When images exposed to the veneration of the faithful in churches or oratories are to be repaired, which are precious due to their antiquity, their artistic value or the cult paid to them, their restoration will never be carried out without permission from the Ordinary given in writing; and before granting it, he must consult experts.

1190
1190. § 1 . Selling sacred relics is strictly prohibited.
§ 2 . The famous relics as well as those others that enjoy great veneration of the people cannot in any way be validly alienated or transferred in perpetuity without permission from the Apostolic See.
§ 3 . The provisions of the § 2 also apply to those images that, in a church, enjoy great veneration by the people.

1191
1191. § 1 . The vow, that is, the deliberate and free promise made to God of a possible and better good, must be fulfilled by the virtue of religion.
§ 2 . Unless prohibited by law, all those who enjoy the appropriate use of reason are capable of casting a vote.
§ 3 . A vote made due to serious and unjust fear, or due to fraud, is void ipso jure.

1192
1192. § 1 . The vote is public, if it is received by the legitimate Superior on behalf of the Church; Otherwise it is private.
§ 2 . It is solemn, if the Church recognizes it as such; Otherwise it is simple.
§ 3 . It is personal, when an action is promised by the person who issues it; real, when something is promised; mixed, the one that participates in the nature of the personal and real vote.

1193
1193. In itself, the vote is binding only on the person who cast it.

1194
1194. The vote ceases due to the expiration of the predetermined time to fulfill the obligation, due to a substantial change in the subject matter of the promise, due to the condition on which the vote depends not being verified or due to the lack of its final cause, due to dispensation and commutation.

1195
1195. Whoever has power over the matter of the vote may suspend its obligation during the time in which its fulfillment causes harm.

1196
1196. In addition to the Roman Pontiff, they can dispense, with just cause, from private vows, provided that the dispensation does not infringe a right acquired by others:
1 the Ordinary of the place and the parish priest, with respect to all his subjects and also to passers-by;
2 the Superior of a religious institute or of a society of apostolic life, provided that they are clerical and of pontifical right, with regard to members, novices and people who live day and night in a house of the institute or society;
3 those to whom the Apostolic See or the local Ordinary has delegated the power to dispense.

1197
1197. Whoever cast a private vote can commute the promised work for another better or equally good one; and the person who has the power to dispense under c. 1196.

1198
1198. Vows cast before religious profession are suspended as long as the one who cast them remains in the religious institute.

1199
1199. § 1 . The oath, that is, the invocation of the Name of God as a witness to the truth, can only be taken truthfully, sensibly and with justice.
§ 2 . The oath that the canons require or admit cannot be validly taken through a procurator.

1200
1200. §1 . Whoever freely swears that he will do something acquires a peculiar religious obligation to fulfill what he confirmed with an oath.
§ 2 . An oath taken by fraud, violence or serious fear is void ipso iure.

1201
1201. §1 . The promissory oath follows the nature and conditions of the act to which it is attached.
§ 2 . If an act that directly results in harm to others or harm to the public good or eternal salvation is corroborated by oath, the act does not therefore acquire any finality.

1202
1202. The obligation arising from a promissory oath ceases:
1 if the person for whose benefit the oath was sworn condones it;
2 if the subject of the oath substantially changes or, due to the circumstances having changed, it is bad or totally indifferent, or, finally, it prevents a greater good;
3 due to lack of final cause or failure to verify the condition under which the oath was taken;
4 by dispensation or commutation in accordance with c. 1203.

1203
1203. Those who have the power to suspend, dispense or commute a vow, enjoy the same power and for the same reason with respect to the promissory oath; But if the dispensation from the oath results in the detriment of others who refuse to condone the obligation, only the Apostolic See can dispense from that oath.

1204
1204. The oath must be interpreted strictly, according to the law and intention of the one who issues it or, if he acts fraudulently, according to the intention of the person to whom the oath is given.

1205
1205. Sacred places are those that are intended for divine worship or the burial of the faithful through the dedication or blessing prescribed by the liturgical books.

1206
1206. The dedication of a place corresponds to the diocesan Bishop and those who are equivalent to him by law; Such persons may entrust any Bishop or, in exceptional cases, a priest, with the task of carrying out this dedication in their territory.

1207
1207. Sacred places are blessed by the Ordinary; However, the blessing of the churches is reserved to the diocesan Bishop; but both can delegate to a priest.

1208
1208. A record must be drawn up of the dedication or blessing of a church, and also of the blessing of a cemetery; One copy will be kept in the diocesan curia, and another in the church archive.

1209
1209. The dedication or blessing of a place, provided it does not harm anyone, is sufficiently proven by a single witness free from all suspicion.

1210
1210. Only that which favors the exercise and promotion of worship, piety and religion may be admitted in a sacred place, and that which is not in keeping with the sanctity of the place is prohibited. However, the Ordinary may allow, in specific cases, other uses, as long as they are not contrary to the sanctity of the place.

1211
1211. Sacred places are violated when, to the scandal of the faithful, seriously injurious acts are committed there which, in the opinion of the Ordinary of the place, are of such gravity and are so contrary to the sanctity of the place, that worship cannot be exercised there until the injury is repaired by a penitential rite in accordance with the liturgical books.

1212
1212. Sacred places lose their dedication or blessing if they are largely destroyed or if they are permanently reduced to profane uses by decree of the Ordinary or in fact.

1213
1213. The ecclesiastical authority freely exercises its powers and functions in sacred places.

1214
1214. By church is meant a sacred building intended for divine worship, to which the faithful have the right to enter for the celebration, especially public, of divine worship.

1215
1215. § 3, and fulfill the sacred ministries, in accordance with what is established by law.
1215. § 1 . A church cannot be built without the express consent of the diocesan Bishop, given in writing.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop should not give consent unless, after hearing the presbyteral council and the rectors of the neighboring churches, he judges that the new church can serve for the good of souls and that the necessary means will not be lacking to build it and to sustain divine worship in it.
§ 3 . Religious institutes must also obtain permission from the diocesan Bishop before building a church in a fixed and determined place, even if they already had his consent to establish a new house in the diocese or city.

1216
1216. In the construction and repair of churches, taking into account the advice of experts, the principles and norms of the liturgy and sacred art must be observed.

1217
1217. § 1 . Once the construction is properly completed, the new church must be dedicated or at least blessed as soon as possible, according to the liturgical laws.
§ 2 . Churches, especially cathedrals and parish churches, should be dedicated with a solemn rite.

1218
1218. Each church must have its own title, which cannot be changed once the dedication has been made.

1219
1219. In the legitimately dedicated or blessed church all acts of divine worship can be carried out, without prejudice to parish rights.

1220
1220. § 1 . Let all those to whom it corresponds ensure that the churches have the cleanliness and neatness that befits the house of God, and that anything that is not in keeping with the sanctity of the place is avoided.
§ 2 . To protect sacred and precious property, ordinary conservation care and appropriate security measures must be used.

1221
1221. Admission to the church must be free of charge during the time of sacred celebrations.

1222
1222. § 1 . If a church cannot be used in any way for divine worship and there is no possibility of repairing it, it may be reduced by the diocesan Bishop to a non-sordid profane use.
§ 2 . When other serious causes advise that a church should cease to be used for divine worship, the diocesan Bishop, after hearing the presbyteral council, may reduce it to a profane, non-sordid use, with the consent of those who legitimately maintain rights over it, and provided that the good of souls does not suffer any detriment as a result.

1223
1223. The name of oratory is designated a place intended for divine worship with the permission of the Ordinary, for the benefit of a community or group of faithful who go there, to which other faithful may also have access, with the consent of the competent Superior.

1224
1224. § 1 . The Ordinary should not grant the license required to establish an oratory before personally or through someone else visiting the place intended for an oratory and considering it worthily installed.
§ 2 . Once the license is granted, the oratory cannot be used for profane uses without authorization from the Ordinary himself.

1225
1225. In legitimately constituted oratories, all sacred celebrations can be held, except those excepted by law, by prescription of the local Ordinary, or where liturgical norms prevent it.

1226
1226. The name of private chapel is designated a place intended for divine worship, with license from the Ordinary of the place for the benefit of one or more natural persons.

1227
1227. Bishops may have a private chapel, which enjoys the same rights as an oratory.

1228
1228. Without prejudice to what is prescribed in c. 1227, to celebrate Mass or other sacred functions in other private chapels, permission from the local Ordinary is required.

1229
1229. It is appropriate that oratories and private chapels be blessed according to the rite prescribed in the liturgical books; and they must be reserved exclusively for divine worship and left free of any domestic use.

1230
1230. The name of sanctuary is designated a church or other sacred place to which, for a peculiar reason of piety, numerous faithful come on pilgrimage, with the approval of the Ordinary of the place.

1231
1231. The approval of the Episcopal Conference is required for a sanctuary to be called national; and the approval of the Holy See, so that it can be called international.

1232
1232. § 1 . It is the responsibility of the local Ordinary to approve the statutes of a diocesan sanctuary; to the Episcopal Conference, those of a national sanctuary; and only to the Holy See those of an international sanctuary.
§ 2 . The statutes must above all determine the purpose, the authority of the rector, and the ownership and administration of the assets.

1233
1233. Certain privileges may be granted to sanctuaries when the circumstances of the place, the attendance of pilgrims and, above all, the good of the faithful so advise.

1234
1234. § 1 . In the sanctuaries the faithful must be abundantly provided with the means of salvation, diligently preaching the word of God and carefully promoting the liturgical life mainly through the celebration of the Eucharist and penance, and also practicing other approved forms of popular piety.
§ 2 . In the sanctuaries or in adjacent places, votive offerings of popular art and piety should be conserved visibly and safely guarded.

1235
1235. § 1 . The altar, or table on which the Eucharistic Sacrifice is celebrated, is called fixed if it is built in a single piece with the ground, so that it cannot move; and mobile, if it can be moved from place to place.
§ 2 . It is advisable that in all churches there be a fixed altar; and in other places intended for sacred celebrations, the altar can be fixed or mobile.

1236
1236. § 1 . According to the traditional practice of the Church, the fixed altar table must be made of stone, and also made of a single block of natural stone; However, in the opinion of the Episcopal Conference, other worthy and solid material can be used; The columns or the base can be made of any material.
§ 2 . The mobile altar can be made of any solid material, which is in line with liturgical use.

1237
1237. § 1 . The fixed altars must be dedicated, and the mobile ones dedicated or blessed, according to the rites prescribed in the liturgical books.
§ 2 . The ancient tradition of placing relics of Martyrs or other Saints under the fixed altar must be observed, according to liturgical norms.

1238
1238. § 1 . The altar loses its dedication or blessing according to c. 1212.
§ 2 . Due to the reduction of the church or other sacred place to profane uses, fixed or mobile altars do not lose their dedication or blessing.

1239
1239. § 1 . The altar, both fixed and mobile, must be reserved only for divine worship, absolutely excluding any profane use.
§ 2 . No corpse can be buried under the altar; Otherwise, it is not licit to celebrate Mass there.

1240
1240. § 1 . Where possible, the Church should have its own cemeteries, or at least a space in civil cemeteries duly blessed, intended for the burial of the faithful.
§ 2 . If this is not possible, each grave must be blessed individually.

1241
1241. § 1 . Parishes and religious institutes can have their own cemetery.
§ 2 . Other legal entities or families may also have their own cemetery or pantheon, which will be blessed at the discretion of the local Ordinary.

1242
1242. Corpses should not be buried in churches, unless it is the Roman Pontiff or Cardinals or diocesan Bishops, even "emeritus", are buried in their own church.

1243
1243. Appropriate regulations on the operation of cemeteries must be established by private law, especially to protect and highlight their sacred character.

1244
1244. § 1 . It corresponds exclusively to the supreme authority of the Church to establish, transfer or suppress the days of celebrations and days of penitence common to the entire Church, without prejudice to what is established in the c

1245
1245. The right of diocesan Bishops contained in c. 87, with just cause and according to the prescriptions of the diocesan Bishop, the parish priest may grant, in particular cases, dispensation from the obligation to observe a day of celebration or penance, or commute it to other pious works; and the Superior of a religious institute or of a society of apostolic life, if they are clerical of pontifical right, can do the same with respect to his own subjects and others who live day and night in the house.

1246
1246. § 2 .
§ 2 . Diocesan Bishops can designate special days of celebration or penance for their dioceses or places, but only as an act.
1246. § 1 . Sunday, on which the paschal mystery is celebrated, by apostolic tradition must be observed throughout the Church as a primary feast of obligation. Likewise, the days of Christmas, Epiphany, Ascension, Most Holy Body and Blood of Christ, Holy Mary Mother of God, Immaculate Conception and Assumption, Saint Joseph, Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and, finally, All Saints' Days must be observed.
§ 2 . However, the Episcopal Conference, with prior approval from the Apostolic See, may suppress or transfer some of the holy days of obligation to Sunday.

1247
1247. On Sunday and other holy days of obligation, the faithful have the obligation to participate in Mass; and they will also abstain from those works and activities that prevent them from worshiping God, enjoying the joy of the Lord's Day, or enjoying proper rest of the mind and body.

1248
1248. § 1 . The precept of participating in the Mass is fulfilled by those who attend it, wherever it is celebrated in a Catholic rite, both on the day of the feast and the day before in the afternoon.
§ 2 . When the absence of the sacred minister or another serious cause makes participation in the Eucharistic celebration impossible, it is strongly recommended that the faithful participate in the Liturgy of the Word, whether it is celebrated in the parish church or in another sacred place as prescribed by the diocesan Bishop, or remain in prayer for the appropriate time personally, as a family, or, if appropriate, in family groups.

1249
1249. All the faithful, each in their own way, are obliged by divine law to do penance; However, so that everyone can unite in some common practice of penance, some penitential days have been established, in which the faithful dedicate themselves in a special way to prayer, perform works of piety and charity and deny themselves, fulfilling their own obligations with greater fidelity and, above all, observing fasting and abstinence, in accordance with the canons that follow.

1250
1250. In the universal Church, penitential days and times are every Friday of the year and the season of Lent.

1251
1251. Every Friday, unless they coincide with a solemnity, abstinence from meat or other food determined by the Episcopal Conference must be observed; Fasting and abstinence will be observed on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday.

1252
1252. The law of abstinence obliges those who have reached the age of fourteen; that of fasting, to all those of legal age, until they have reached fifty-nine years. However, pastors of souls and parents should ensure that those who, because they have not reached the age, are not obliged to fast or abstinence are also trained in an authentic spirit of penitence.

1253
1253. The Episcopal Conference can determine in more detail the way to observe fasting and abstinence, as well as replace them in whole or in part with other forms of penance, especially by works of charity and practices of piety.

1254
1254. § 1 . By native law, and independently of civil power, the Catholic Church can acquire, retain, administer and dispose of temporal property to achieve its own purposes.
§ 2 . Its own purposes are mainly the following: to sustain divine worship, to honestly support the clergy and other ministers, and to carry out works of sacred apostolate and charity, especially with those in need.

1255
1255. The universal Church and the Apostolic See, and also the particular Churches and any other legal entity, both public and private, are subjects capable of acquiring, retaining, managing and alienating temporal goods, according to the legal norm.

1256
1256. The ownership of goods corresponds, under the supreme authority of the Roman Pontiff, to the legal person who has legitimately acquired them.

1257
1257. § 1 . All temporal goods that belong to the universal Church, to the Apostolic See or to other public legal entities in the Church, are ecclesiastical goods, and are governed by the canons that follow, as well as by the statutes themselves.
§ 2 . The temporary assets of a private legal entity are governed by its own statutes, and not by these canons, unless otherwise expressly indicated.

1258
1258. In the canons that follow, the name Church is designated not only the universal Church or the Apostolic See, but also any public person in the Church, unless otherwise stated by the context or by the very nature of the matter.

1259
1259. The Church can acquire temporal goods by all just means, of natural or positive law, that are permitted to others.

1260
1260. The Church has the native right to demand from the faithful the goods it needs for its own purposes.

1261
1261. § 1 . The faithful are free to contribute temporal goods in favor of the Church.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop must warn the faithful and urge them in a timely manner about the obligation referred to in c.

1262
1262. Let the faithful help the Church through the subsidies requested of them and according to the norms established by the Episcopal Conference.

1263
1263. To meet the needs of the diocese, the diocesan Bishop has the right to impose a moderate tax on public legal entities subject to his jurisdiction, which is proportionate to their income, after hearing the council of economic affairs and the presbyteral council; With respect to other natural and legal persons, you are only allowed to impose an extraordinary and moderate contribution, in case of serious need and under the same conditions, leaving aside the particular laws and customs that recognize broader rights.

1264
1264. Unless the law provides otherwise, it corresponds to the meeting of Bishops of each province:
1 determine the fees that must be paid for acts of gracious executive power or for the execution of rescripts of the Apostolic See, and that must be approved by the Apostolic See;
2 determine the oblations that are to be made on the occasion of the administration of the sacraments and sacramentals.

1265
1265. § 1 . Without prejudice to the right of mendicant religious, it is prohibited for any private person, both physical and legal, to make inquiries for any pious or ecclesiastical institution or purpose, without written permission from the own Ordinary and the local Ordinary.
§ 2 . Regarding the collection of alms, the Episcopal Conference can dictate norms, which must be observed by everyone, even those who, by institution, call themselves and are mendicants.

1266
1266. In all churches and oratories that are in fact usually open to the faithful, even if they belong to religious institutes, the local Ordinary may order that a special collection be made in favor of certain parish, diocesan, national or universal works, and that it must be diligently sent to the diocesan curia.

1267
1267. § 1 . If the contrary is not stated, oblations delivered to the Superiors or administrators of any ecclesiastical legal entity, even if it is private, are presumed to have been made to the legal entity.
§ 2 . The oblations referred to in § 1 cannot be rejected without just cause, nor things of greater importance without permission from the Ordinary when it comes to a public legal entity; The same license is required to accept those that are encumbered by a modal load or a condition, the provisions of c. 1295.
§ 3 . Oblations made by the faithful for a specific purpose can only be used for that purpose.

1268
1268. Regarding temporal goods, the Church accepts prescription as a way of acquiring or releasing them, in accordance with cc. 197-199.

1269
1269. Sacred things, if they are in the domain of private persons, can be acquired by other private persons, by virtue of the prescription, but it is not lawful to dedicate them to profane uses, unless they have lost the dedication or blessing; If they belong, however, to a public ecclesiastical legal entity, they can only be acquired by another public ecclesiastical legal entity.

1270
1270. Real estate, precious movable property and rights and actions, both personal and real, that belong to the Apostolic See expire within a period of one hundred years; those belonging to another public ecclesiastical legal entity, within a period of thirty years.

1271
1271. By reason of the bond of unity and charity, and according to the possibilities of their diocese, the Bishops contribute to ensuring that the Apostolic See has the means that, according to the different circumstances, it needs for the due service to the universal Church.

1272
1272. In the regions where benefices themselves still exist, it is up to the Episcopal Conference to determine their regime, according to norms established in accordance with the Apostolic See and approved by it, so that the income and even, to the extent possible, the endowment of the benefices themselves, gradually pass to the institution in question in the c

1273
1273. By virtue of his primacy of regime, the Roman Pontiff is the supreme administrator and distributor of all ecclesiastical goods.

1274
1274. § 1 .
1274. § 1 . In every diocese there must be a special institute that collects the goods and oblations to provide according to the c
1274. § 1, unless the founder's will was expressly stated otherwise; Otherwise, they revert to the same legal entity.

1275
1275. The mass of goods coming from different dioceses is administered according to the norms duly agreed upon by the interested Bishops.

1276
1276. § 1 . It is the responsibility of the Ordinary to diligently supervise the administration of all assets belonging to the public legal entities that are subject to him, leaving aside other legitimate titles that confer broader rights.
§ 2 . Taking into account the rights, legitimate customs and circumstances, the Ordinaries should take care to organize everything related to the administration of ecclesiastical property, giving particular instructions within the limits of universal and particular law.

1277
1277. Regarding the performance of administrative acts that, given the economic situation of the diocese, are of greater importance, the diocesan Bishop must hear the council of economic affairs and the college of consultants; but, apart from cases specially determined in universal law or in the founding deed, it requires the consent of the council itself as well as the college of consultants to carry out acts of extraordinary administration. It is up to the Episcopal Conference to determine which acts are to be considered extraordinary administration.

1278
1278. In addition to the functions indicated in the c

1279
1279. § 1 . The administration of ecclesiastical property corresponds to the person who immediately governs the person to whom those property belongs, unless otherwise determined by particular law, statutes or legitimate custom, and the right of the Ordinary to intervene in case of negligence on the part of the administrator is preserved.
§ 2 . For the administration of the assets of a public legal entity that does not have its own administrators by law, by a founding deed, or by its statutes, the Ordinary to whom it is subject will appoint suitable persons for a period of three years; This appointment is renewable.

1280
1280. Every legal entity must have its economic affairs council, or at least two advisors, who, in accordance with the statutes, help the administrator in the fulfillment of his function.

1281
1281. § 1 . The prescriptions of the statutes remaining firm, the administrators invalidly carry out acts that exceed the limits and manner of ordinary administration, unless they have previously obtained written authorization from the Ordinary.
§ 2 . It must be determined in the statutes which acts exceed the limit and method of ordinary administration; and if the statutes do not prescribe anything on this issue, it is up to the diocesan Bishop, after hearing the council on economic affairs, to determine what these acts are for the people who are subject to him.
§ 3 . Unless it has brought a benefit, and to the extent of the same, the legal entity is not obliged to respond for the acts carried out invalidly by the administrators; But for the acts that they carry out illegitimately but validly, the same legal entity will be responsible, without prejudice to its right of action or appeal against the administrators who have caused damage.

1282
1282. All those, clerics or laymen, who participate by legitimate title in the administration of ecclesiastical property, must fulfill their functions in the name of the Church, and in accordance with the law.

1283
1283. Before administrators begin to exercise their function:
1 they must promise by oath before the Ordinary or his delegate that they will administer well and faithfully;
2 an exact and detailed inventory is made, signed by them, of the real estate, of the movable property, both precious and belonging in some way to the cultural heritage, and of any others, with the description and appraisal of the same; and check it once done;
3 keep a copy of this inventory in the administration archive, and another in the Curia archive; Note in both any changes that the assets experience.

1284
1284. § 1 . All administrators are obliged to fulfill their role with the diligence of a good father of a family.
§ 2 . They must therefore:
1 ensure that the assets entrusted to their care do not perish in any way or suffer damage, signing insurance contracts for this purpose, if necessary;
2 ensure that the ownership of ecclesiastical property is ensured by civilly valid means;
3 observe the canonical and civil norms, those imposed by the founder or donor or by legitimate authority, and take care above all that no harm comes to the Church due to non-observance of civil laws;
4 diligently and timely collect the income and proceeds from the assets, safely preserve those already collected and use them according to the intention of the founder or legitimate regulations;
5 punctually pay the interest due on a loan or mortgage, and ensure that the borrowed capital is returned in due time;
6 with the consent of the Ordinary, apply to the purposes of the legal entity the money left over from the payment of expenses and that can be invested productively;
7 keep the entry and exit books in order;
8 prepare administration accounts at the end of each year;
9 duly organize and keep in a convenient and suitable file the documents and instruments on which the rights of the Church or the institute over the property are based; and, where it can be easily done, deposit authentic copies of them in the archive of the curia.
§ 3 . It is strongly advised that administrators budget for inputs and outputs each year; and it is left to individual law to prescribe it and determine in detail the way of presenting it.

1285
1285. Only within the limits of ordinary administration is it lawful for administrators to make donations for purposes of piety or Christian charity with movable property that does not belong to the stable patrimony.

1286
1286. Property administrators:
1 in employment contracts and in accordance with the principles taught by the Church, they must also carefully observe civil laws on labor and social matters;
2 must pay a fair and honest salary to the hired personnel, so that they can conveniently satisfy the personal needs and those of their loved ones.

1287
1287. § 1 . The contrary custom being condemned, the administrators, both clerical and lay, of any ecclesiastical property that is not legitimately exempt from the power of regime of the diocesan Bishop, must render accounts each year to the local Ordinary who will in charge of its review by the council of economic affairs.
§ 2 . The administrators are accountable to the faithful about the goods that they deliver to the Church, according to the norms determined by particular law.

1288
1288. Administrators must not initiate litigation on behalf of a public legal entity, nor respond to the claim in civil jurisdiction, without having obtained written permission from their own Ordinary.

1289
1289. Although they are not obliged to administer by virtue of an ecclesiastical office, administrators cannot abandon the position received at their own discretion; and if damage is caused to the Church by this arbitrary abandonment, they are obliged to make restitution.

1290
1290. What civil law establishes in each territory on contracts, both in general and in particular, and on payments, must be observed with the same effects under canon law in matters subject to the power of regime of the Church, unless it is contrary to divine law or canon law prescribes otherwise, excepting c. 1547.

1291
1291. To validly dispose of assets that by legitimate assignment constitute the stable assets of a public legal entity and whose value exceeds the amount established by law, a license from the competent authority is required in accordance with the law.

1292
1292. § 1 . Remaining safe as prescribed in the c

1293
1293. § 1 . For the disposal of assets, the value of which exceeds the determined minimum amount, the following is also required:
1 just cause, such as an urgent need, an obvious usefulness, piety, charity or another serious pastoral reason;
2 appraisal of the thing to be sold, made by experts and in writing.
§ 2 . To avoid harm to the Church, those other precautions prescribed by legitimate authority must also be observed.

1294
1294. § 1 . Ordinarily, a thing should not be sold for a price lower than that indicated in the appraisal.
§ 2 . The money collected from the alienation must be carefully placed for the benefit of the Church, or spent prudently in accordance with the purposes of said alienation.

1295
1295. The requirements established in ccs. 1291-1294, to which the statutes of legal entities must also be accommodated, must be observed not only in disposals, but also in any operation from which the financial situation of the legal entity may be harmed.

1296
1296. If ecclesiastical property was alienated without due canonical solemnities, but the alienation was civilly valid, it is up to the competent authority, after properly weighing everything, to determine whether or not an action should be brought, and of what type, that is, whether personal or real, and by whom and against whom, to vindicate the rights of the Church.

1297
1297. Taking into account the circumstances of the places, it is up to the Episcopal Conference to establish regulations on the leasing of Church property, and mainly the license that must be obtained from the competent ecclesiastical authority.

1298
1298. Unless the thing has very little value, ecclesiastical property should not be sold or leased to the administrators themselves or to their relatives up to the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity, without special permission from the competent ecclesiastical authority given in writing.

1299
1299. § 1 . Whoever, by natural and canon law, is capable of freely disposing of his property, may leave it to pious causes, both by act inter vivos and mortis causa.
§ 2 . For mortis causa dispositions for the benefit of the Church, the solemnities prescribed by civil order must be observed, if possible; If these have been omitted, the heirs must be warned about their obligation to comply with the will of the testator.

1300
1300. Once accepted, the wills of the faithful who donate or leave their property for pious causes by acts inter vivos or mortis causa must be carried out with utmost diligence, even as regards the way of administering and investing the property, except as prescribed by the c

1301
1301. § 3 .
1301. § 1 . The Ordinary is the executor of all pious wills, both mortis causa and inter vivos.
§ 2 . By virtue of this right, the Ordinary can and must monitor, also through visits, that pious wills are fulfilled; and the other executors must be accountable to him, once their function has been fulfilled.
§ 3 . The clauses contained in the last wills that are contrary to this right of the Ordinary will be considered not included.

1302
1302. § 1 . Whoever acquired as a trustee property intended for pious causes, whether by inter vivos act or by will, must inform the Ordinary of his trust, giving him an account of all those assets, both movable and immovable, and the attached charges, but if the donor has prohibited this, expressly and totally, he must not accept the trust.
§ 2 . The Ordinary must demand that the goods given in trust be placed safely, and monitor the execution of the pious will in accordance with c. 1301.
§ 3 . When goods have been delivered in trust to a member of a religious institute, or of a society of apostolic life, if they are intended for a place or diocese, or for its inhabitants or to help pious causes, the Ordinary referred to in §§ 1 and 2 is the one of the place; Otherwise, he is the Major Superior in the clerical institute of pontifical right and in the clerical societies of apostolic life of pontifical right, or the Ordinary proper to the same member in the other religious institutes.

1303
1303. § 1 . Under the name of pious foundations the law includes:
1 the autonomous pious foundations, that is, the groups of things destined for the purposes discussed in c.

1304
1304. § 1 . For a legal entity to validly accept a foundation, a written license from the Ordinary is required; license that will not be granted without having legitimately verified that the legal entity can comply with both the new burden and those previously accepted; and he must take care above all that the income fully covers the attached charges, according to the uses of the place or the region.
§ 2 . Private law will determine more specific conditions for the constitution and acceptance of foundations.

1305
1305. The money and movable property assigned as a dowry must be deposited immediately in a safe place approved by the Ordinary, in order to preserve that money or the price of the movable property, and place it as soon as possible, cautiously and usefully, for the benefit of the foundation, with express and detailed mention of the charges, according to the prudent judgment of the Ordinary, after hearing the interested parties and his own advice on economic matters.

1306
1306. § 1 . The foundations, even those made by word of mouth, must be recorded in writing.
§ 2 . A copy of the founding deed will be kept safely in the archive of the curia, and another in the archive of the interested legal entity.

1307
1307. § 1 . In compliance with the prescriptions of cc. 1300-1302 and 1287, a table must be made of the charges of the pious foundations, and placed in a visible place, so that the obligations that must be fulfilled do not fall into oblivion.
§ 2 . In addition to the book referred to in c.

1308
1308. n § 1: The reduction of the burden of Masses, which will only be done for a just and necessary cause, is reserved to the diocesan Bishop or the Superior General of an institute of consecrated life or of a society of clerical apostolic life.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop has the power to reduce the number of Masses to be celebrated by virtue of legacies valid in themselves, when income has decreased and as long as this cause persists, taking into account the stipend legitimately in force in the diocese, provided that there is no one who is obliged and who can be effectively required to increase the alms.
§3 . The same Bishop has the power to reduce the burdens or legacies of Masses that weigh on ecclesiastical institutions, if the income has become insufficient to conveniently achieve the proper purpose of said institution.
§4 . The Superior General of an institute of consecrated life or of a society of clerical apostolic life enjoys the same faculties expressed in §§ 2 and 3.
1308. the power to transfer, for a proportionate reason, the loads of Masses to days, churches or altars other than those that were determined in the foundation.
1308. § 1 . The reduction of Mass charges, which will only be done for just and necessary reasons, is reserved to the Apostolic See, except as indicated below.
§ 2 . If this is expressly indicated in the founding deed, the Ordinary can reduce the burden of Masses due to having reduced income.
§ 3 . The diocesan Bishop has the power to reduce the number of Masses to be celebrated by virtue of legacies or other Titles valid in themselves, when income has decreased and as long as this cause persists, taking into account the stipend legitimately in force in the diocese, provided that there is no one who is obliged and who can be effectively required to increase the alms.
§ 4 . The same Bishop has the power to reduce the burdens or legacies of Masses that weigh on ecclesiastical institutions, if the income has become insufficient to conveniently achieve the proper purpose of said institution.
§ 5 . The Superior General of a clerical religious institute of pontifical right enjoys the same powers expressed in §§ 3 and 4.

1309
1309. It is also the responsibility of the authorities mentioned in the c

1310
1310. n § 1 . The Ordinary may reduce, moderate or commute the will of the faithful on pious causes, only for just and necessary cause, after hearing the interested parties, and his own council on economic matters and respecting in the best possible way the will of the founder.
§ 2 . In other cases, you must turn to the Apostolic See.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Competentias quasdam decernere of February 11, 2022)]:
1310. § 1 . If the founder expressly granted the Ordinary the power to reduce, moderate or commute the will of the faithful for pious causes, he can do so only for just and necessary cause.
§ 2 . If the fulfillment of the charges becomes impossible, due to a decrease in income or for any other reason, through no fault of the administrators, the Ordinary may equitably reduce those charges, after hearing the interested parties and his own council of economic affairs, and respecting in the best possible way the will of the founder; The reduction of Masses is excepted, however, and is governed by the prescriptions of c. 1308.
§ 3 . In other cases, you must turn to the Apostolic See.

1311
1311. § 1 . The Church has original right and 
proper to punish with criminal sanctions the faithful who have 
committed crimes.
§ 2 . Whoever presides in the Church must guard and promote the 
good of the community itself and of each of the faithful with the 
pastoral charity, the example of life, advice and 
exhortation, and, if necessary, also with the imposition or the 
declaration of penalties, in accordance with the precepts of the law, which 
must always be applied with canonical equity, and keeping in mind 
the restoration of justice, the amendment of the prisoner and the 
reparation of the scandal.

1312
1312. § 1 . The criminal sanctions in the Church are:
1st medicinal penalties or censures, which are indicated in ccs. 
1331-1333;
2nd expiatory penalties, which are discussed in c. 1336.
§ 2 . The law may establish other expiatory penalties, which deprive 
to a faithful of some spiritual or temporal good, and are in 
conformity with the supernatural purpose of the Church.
§ 3 . Penal remedies and penances are also used, indicated 
in the cc. 1339 and 1340: those, above all, to prevent 
crimes; these, rather, to apply instead of a penalty, or 
to increase it.

1313
1313. § 1 . If the law changes after 
committed a crime, the most favorable law for the crime must be applied 
prisoner
§ 2 . If a later law repeals a previous one or, at least, 
abolishes the penalty, it ceases immediately.

1314
1314. The penalty is ordinarily ferendae 
sententiae, so that it only obliges the prisoner since he has 
been imposed; but it is latae sententiae if the law or the 
precept they establish it expressly, so that it incurs ipso 
fact in it who commits the crime.

1315
1315. § 1 . Who has the power to make laws 
criminals, can also protect with a suitable penalty a law 
divine.
§ 2 . The lower legislator, keeping in mind c. 1317, may, 
furthermore:
1st protect with a suitable penalty the law promulgated by a 
higher authority, respecting the limits of its competence 
reason for the territory or the people;
2nd add other penalties to those already established by universal law 
against some crime;
3. determine or make mandatory the penalty that in universal law 
is established as indeterminate or optional.
§ 3 . The law may determine the penalty or leave its determination to 
the judge's prudent estimate.

1316
1316. Let the diocesan Bishops take care that, in the 
As far as possible, criminal laws are given uniformly 
for the same State or region.

1317
1317. Penalties must be established only in the 
to the extent that they are truly necessary to better provide for the 
ecclesiastical discipline. Expulsion from the clerical state cannot 
be established by the lower legislator.

1318
1318. Latae penalties should not be established 
sententiae, if not against some intentional crimes 
special ones that may cause a more serious scandal, or cannot 
be effectively punished with ferendae sententiae penalties; and not 
censures must be established, especially excommunication, if it is not 
with maximum moderation, and only against crimes of special 
gravity.

1319
1319. § 1 . To the extent that someone, by virtue of 
its power of regime, can impose precepts in the external forum 
according to the provisions of the ccs. 48-58, may also require 
by precept with determined penalties, except expiatory ones 
perpetual
§ 2 . If, after diligent reflection, a precept has to be imposed 
penal, observe what is established in cc. 1317 and 1318.

1320
1320. In everything that religious people depend on 
Ordinary of the place, he can punish them with penalties.

1321
1321. § 1 . Every person is considered innocent 
until proven otherwise.
§ 2 . No one can be punished unless the external violation 
of a law or precept that he has committed is seriously attributable to him 
out of fraud or guilt.
§ 3 . Whoever 
deliberately infringed them; who did it by omission of the 
due diligence, should not be punished, unless the law or the 
precept provide otherwise.
§ 4 . Once the external infraction has been committed, imputability is presumed, 
unless stated otherwise.

1322
1322. They are considered incapable of committing a crime 
those who habitually lack the use of reason, although they have 
violated a law or precept when they appeared to be healthy.

1323
1323. He is not subject to any penalty who, when 
violated a law or precept:
1st he had not yet turned sixteen years old;
2. he was blamelessly unaware that he was violating a law or precept; and 
Inadvertence and error are equated with ignorance;
3rd he acted by violence, or by chance that he could not foresee or that 
once foreseen, could not avoid;
4th he acted under coercion out of serious fear, even if it was only 
relatively, or out of necessity or to avoid serious harm, to 
unless the act was intrinsically evil or resulted in harm to 
the souls;
5. acted in legitimate defense against an unjust aggressor of himself 
or from another, maintaining due moderation;
6. lacked the use of reason, without prejudice to what is prescribed in 
the ccs. 1324, § 1 , 2nd, and 1326, § 1 , 4th;
7th judged without fault that any of the circumstances occurred 
indicated in nos. 4th or 5th.
1323. and 1324, gross, supine or ignorant ignorance can never be taken into account. 
affected.

1324
1324. § 1 . The offender is not exempt from the penalty, 
but the penalty established in the law or in the precept must be mitigated, 
or employ a penance in its place, when the crime has been 
task:
1. by someone who had only imperfect use of reason;
2. by someone who lacked the use of reason due to drunkenness or other 
similar disturbance of the mind, of which he was guilty, 
the provisions of c. 1326, § 1 , 4th;
3rd by serious impulse of passion, but which did not precede, 
preventing them, to any deliberation of the mind and consent 
of the will, provided that the passion had not been 
voluntarily provoked or encouraged;
4.º by a minor, who has reached the age of sixteen;
5. by someone who acted under coercion due to serious fear, even if it were coerced 
only relatively, or out of necessity or to avoid harm 
serious, if the crime is intrinsically bad or results in harm to the 
souls;
6. by whom he acted in legitimate defense against an unjust aggressor of 
himself or another, but without maintaining due moderation;
7. against him who seriously and unjustly provokes;
8. by whom he mistakenly but culpably judged that there was some 
of the circumstances indicated in c. 1323, nos. 4 or 5;
9.º by those who, without fault, were unaware that the law or the precept carried 
attaches a penalty;
10. by someone who acted without full imputability, provided that this 
remains serious.
§ 2 . The judge can do the same, if any other 
circumstance that reduces the seriousness of the crime.
§ 3 . Under the circumstances listed in § 1, the prisoner does not 
is bound by latae sententiae penalties, but, with the 
In order to obtain your amendment or to repair the scandal, you can 
More lenient penalties may be imposed or penances may be applied.

1325
1325. When applying the prescriptions of the cc

1326
1326. § 1 . The judge must punish more seriously 
than that established in the law or in the precept:
1. to whom, after a conviction or sentence of sentence, continues 
committing a crime in such a way that, due to the circumstances, 
prudently infer his persistence in ill will;
2nd to someone who is constituted in some dignity, or who abused his 
authority or office to commit the crime;
3rd to whom, when a penalty has been established for a crime 
guilty, he foresaw what was to happen, and yet he omitted the 
precautions to avoid it that any person would have used 
diligent;
4th to anyone who has committed a crime while intoxicated or otherwise 
disturbance of the mind, which has been caused 
intentionally to commit or excuse the crime, or out of passion 
voluntarily excited or encouraged.
§ 2 . In the cases discussed in § 1, if the penalty 
established is latae sententiae, another penalty can be added or 
penitence.
§ 3 . In the same cases, if the penalty is established as 
optional becomes mandatory.

1327
1327. In addition to the cases discussed in the 
cc. 1323-1326, the particular law may establish other 
exonerating, mitigating or aggravating circumstances, both as a rule 
general as for a particular crime. Likewise, they can 
establish in the precept circumstances that exempt from the penalty 
established by it, reduce it or aggravate it.

1328
1328. § 1 . Whoever did or omitted something to commit a crime 
crime, but, regardless of his will, he did not come to 
consummate it, is not subject to the penalty established against the crime 
consummated, unless the law or precept provides otherwise.
§ 2 . If the acts or omissions lead by their very nature to 
execution of the crime, the perpetrator may be punished with a 
penance or penal remedy, unless, once the punishment has begun 
commission of the crime, he would have voluntarily desisted from it. 
But, if there had been a scandal or other serious damage or danger, the 
author, even if he had voluntarily desisted, can be punished 
with a fair penalty, but always less than that established for the 
consummated crime.

1329
1329. § 1 . Those with the same criminal intent 
participate in the commission of a crime, and are not mentioned 
expressly in the law or precept because the 
ferendae sententiae penalties against the main author, remain 
subject to the same penalties, or others of the same or lesser 
gravity.
§ 2 . Accomplices not mentioned in the law or in the precept incur 
in the latae sententiae penalty corresponding to a crime, 
provided that this would not have been committed without their help and the penalty is 
of such a nature that it can also affect them; in case 
Otherwise, they may be punished with ferendae sententiae penalties.

1330
1330. The crime that 
consists of a declaration or other manifestation of the will, 
doctrine or knowledge, if no one perceives such declaration or 
manifestation.

1331
1331. § 1 . The excommunicated person is prohibited from:
1st the celebration of the Eucharistic Sacrifice and the others 
sacraments;
2nd receive the sacraments;
3rd administer the sacramentals and celebrate the other ceremonies of 
liturgical worship;
4th having any active part in the celebrations previously 
enumerated;
5. Perform offices, positions, ministries and functions 
ecclesiastics;
6th carry out acts of regime.
§ 2 . When the ferendae sententiae excommunication has been 
imposed or the latae sententiae has been declared, the prisoner:
1. If you want to act against what is prescribed in the § 1, 
1st-4th, must be rejected or the liturgical ceremony must cease, 
unless a serious cause obstructs;
2. invalidly performs the acts of the regime, which according to the § 1, 
6.º, they are illegal;
3. You are prohibited from enjoying the privileges that you previously received. 
would have been granted;
4.º does not acquire the remuneration that is merely entitled 
ecclesiastical;
5th is ineligible to obtain offices, positions, ministries, functions, 
rights, privileges and honorary titles.

1332
1332. § 1 . Whoever is in question is subject to 
the prohibitions listed in c. 1331, § 1, no. 1-4.
§ 2 . Law or precept, however, may define the 
interdicted in such a way that the prisoner is prohibited only from certain actions 
certain of those discussed in c. 1331, § 1, no. 1-4, or 
some other certain rights.
§ 3 . Also in the case of interdict, the following must be observed: 
prescribed in c. 1331, § 2, 1st.

1333
1333. § 1 . The suspension prohibits:
1. all or some of the acts of the power of order;
2. all or some of the acts of the power of the regime;
3. the exercise of all or some rights or functions 
inherent to a job.
§ 2 . In the law or in the precept it can be established that, after 
of the sentence or decree that imposes or declares the penalty, not 
the suspended person can validly carry out regime acts.
§ 3 . The ban never affects:
1. to the offices or power of the regime that are not under the 
power of the Superior who establishes the penalty;
2nd to the right of habitation that the prisoner has by reason of his 
trade;
3rd to the right to manage the assets that may belong to the 
office of someone who has suffered suspension, if the penalty is latae 
sententiae.
§ 4 . The suspension that prohibits receiving the fruits, salary, 
pensions or other remuneration, carries with it the obligation to 
to restore what had been received illegitimately, even in good 
faith.

1334
1334. § 1 . Within the limits established in the 
preceding canon, the scope of the suspension is determined either by the 
same law or precept, or by the sentence or decree by which 
imposes the penalty.
§ 2 . The law, but not the precept, can establish a suspension
latae sententiae without adding any determination or limit: 
Such punishment produces all the effects listed in c. 1333, § 1 .

1335
1335. § 1 . The competent authority, when imposing or 
declare censorship in judicial process or by decree 
extrajudicial, may also impose expiatory penalties that 
deemed necessary to restore justice or repair the 
scandal.
§ 2 . If censorship prohibits celebrating the sacraments or 
sacramentals, or perform acts of regime power, the 
prohibition is suspended as many times as necessary to 
care for the faithful in danger of death; and, if censorship latae 
sententiae has not been declared, the 
prohibition how many times a faithful asks for a sacrament or sacramental or 
an act of regime power; and it is legal to request them for any 
just cause.

1336
1336. § 1 . In addition to others that could be established by the 
law, expiatory penalties, likely to affect the offender 
perpetually or for a determined or indeterminate time, are the 
that are indicated in §§ 2 -5.
§ 2 . The mandate:
1. to reside in a certain place or territory;
2nd of paying a pecuniary fine, that is, a sum of money to 
the purposes of the Church, according to the norms determined by the 
Episcopal Conference.
§ 3 . The prohibition:
1. to reside in a certain place or territory;
2nd to perform, in any place or in a certain place or 
territory or outside them, any or some offices, positions, 
ministries or functions, or only some activities inherent to the 
offices or positions;
3. to carry out any or some acts of power of order;
4. to carry out any or some acts of regime power;
5th to exercise any right or privilege, or to use insignia or 
titles;
6th to enjoy active or passive voice in canonical elections, or 
to take part with the right to vote in councils or colleges 
ecclesiastical;
7th to wear the ecclesiastical dress or the religious habit.
§ 4 . The deprivation:
1st of all or some offices, positions, ministries or functions, 
or only of some activities inherent to the trades or the 
charges;
2nd of the power to hear confessions or the power to preach;
3rd of the delegated power of regime;
4.º of any right or privilege or insignia or title;
5th of all or part of the ecclesiastical remuneration, 
according to the norms established by the Episcopal Conference, remaining 
subject to the provisions of Can. 1350, § 1.
§ 5 . Expulsion from the clerical state.

1337
1337. § 1 . The prohibition of residing in a 
certain place or territory can be imposed on both clerics 
as to the religious; the mandate to reside, to the clerics 
seculars, and, within the limits of their constitutions, to the 
religious.
§ 2 . To impose the requirement to reside in a certain 
place or territory, the consent of the Ordinary of 
that place, unless it is a house intended for them to do 
penitence or correction of extradiocesan clergy.

1338
1338. § 1 . The expiatory penalties listed in 
the c. 1336, never affect the powers, offices, positions, 
rights, privileges, faculties, graces, titles or insignia that 
They are not under the power of the Superior who establishes the penalty.
§ 2 . The deprivation of the power of order cannot occur, but 
only the prohibition to exercise this power or some of its acts; 
nor can there be the deprivation of academic degrees.
§ 3 . Regarding the prohibitions indicated in c. 1336, § 3 , has been 
to follow the rule established for censorship in c. 1335, 
§ 2 .
§ 4 . Only expiatory penalties can be latae sententiae 
indicated as prohibitions in c. 1336, § 3, or others that 
perhaps they have been established by law or precept.
§ 5 . The prohibitions discussed in c. 1336, § 3 , 
They are never under penalty of nullity.

1339
1339. § 1 . The Ordinary may, personally or by 
through another, admonish him who is on the next occasion 
of committing a crime, or about which, after carrying out a 
investigation, there is serious suspicion that he has committed a crime.
§ 2 . The Ordinary may reprimand, in a manner proportionate to the 
circumstances of the person and the fact, to the one who provokes with his 
scandalous conduct or serious disturbance of order.
§ 3 . There must always be a record of the warning and the 
reprimand, at least by some document preserved in the 
secret archive of the curia.
§ 4 . If someone, once or several times, has had 
useless reprimands or reprimands, or if it cannot be expected 
effect of them, the Ordinary must give a penal precept, in which 
dictate exactly what is to be done or avoided.
§ 5 . If the severity of the case requires it, and especially if 
someone is in danger of repeating a crime, the 
Ordinary, in addition to the penalties imposed or declared by sentence 
or decree in accordance with law, also subject it to surveillance, of the 
manner determined by singular decree.

1340
1340. § 1 . Penance, which can be imposed in the 
external forum, consists of carrying out some work of religion, of 
piety or charity.
§ 2 . Never impose public penance for a transgression 
hidden.
§ 3 . According to his prudence, the Ordinary may add penances to the 
criminal remedy of reprimand or reprimand.

1341
1341. The Ordinary must promote the procedure 
judicial or administrative to impose or declare penalties when there is 
given that not even the means of pastoral care, especially 
fraternal correction, neither reprimand nor rebuke are enough 
to restore justice, obtain the amendment of the prisoner and 
repair the scandal.

1342
1342. § 1 . When just causes make it difficult to make a 
judicial process, the penalty may be imposed or declared by decree 
extrajudicial, observing c. 1720, especially so 
regards the right of defense and moral certainty in the spirit of 
who gives the decree according to c. 1608. In any case, the 
Penal remedies and penances can be applied through 
decree.
§ 2 . Life sentences cannot be imposed or declared by decree, 
nor those others that the law or precept that establishes them 
prohibits applying by decree.
§ 3 . What is prescribed in the law or in the precept about the 
judge, regarding the imposition or declaration of a sentence in court, 
It also applies to the Superior who imposes or declares a penalty by means of 
extrajudicial decree, unless otherwise stated and it is not 
of prescriptions that refer only to the procedure.

1343
1343. If the law or precept gives him the power to 
whether or not to apply a penalty, the judge, subject to the provisions of the 
c. 1326, § 3, define the case, according to your conscience and prudence, 
in accordance with what the restoration of justice demands, the amendment 
of the prisoner and the reparation of the scandal; The judge, however, can 
Also in these cases, if appropriate, mitigate the penalty or impose 
place a penance.

1344
1344. Although the law uses prescriptive words, 
The judge may, according to his conscience and prudence:
1. Defer the imposition of the sentence to a more opportune time, if 
foresee greater evils due to the hasty punishment of the prisoner, unless 
urge the need to repair the scandal;
2. abstain from imposing the penalty, or impose a more lenient or 
a penance, if the prisoner has made amends and has repaired the scandal 
and the damage perhaps caused, or whether it has already been sufficiently punished 
by civil authority or is anticipated to be so;
3rd suspend the obligation to observe an expiatory penalty if 
It is the first crime committed by the prisoner who until then 
would have lived without blemish, and there was no pressing need to repair the 
scandal, so that, if the prisoner commits another crime within a 
term determined by the same judge, serves the sentence due for the 
crimes unless, in the meantime, the time had elapsed 
necessary for the prescription of the criminal action by the first 
crime.
1344. and 1345.
§ 2 . The promoter of justice may appeal whenever he considers that sufficient provision has not been made to repair the scandal or to restore justice.

1345
1345. Whenever the offender had only use 
imperfect of reason, or would have committed the crime out of necessity, 
or due to grave fear or impulse of passion, or, except as prescribed in 
the c. 1326, § 1, 4th, due to drunkenness or other similar disturbance 
of the mind, the judge can also refrain from imposing punishment 
someone if they consider that in another way it is possible to achieve better 
your amendment; but the prisoner must be punished if he would not otherwise be 
possible to provide for the restoration of justice and reparation 
of the scandal perhaps caused.

1346
1346. § 1 . Ordinarily there must be so many penalties 
How many crimes are there?
§ 2 . But, when a prisoner has committed several crimes, if it seems 
excessive, the accumulation of ferendae sententiae penalties is 
the prudent discretion of the judge to temper the sentences within a few 
equitable limits and subject it to surveillance.

1347
1347. § 1 . A cannot validly be imposed 
censure if the prisoner has not previously been reprimanded at least once to 
to cease in his contumacy, giving him a reasonable time for the 
amendment.
§ 2 . It is considered that the prisoner who is 
has truly repented of the crime, and has also repaired 
conveniently scandal and damage or, at least, has promised 
Seriously do it.

1348
1348. When the accused is acquitted of the accusation, or 
no penalty is imposed on him, the Ordinary can look after his well-being and 
the public good with appropriate warnings or other means of its 
pastoral request, or also, if appropriate, with penal remedies.

1349
1349. If the penalty is indeterminate and the law does not 
provides otherwise, the judge, when determining the sentences, chooses those that 
are proportionate to the scandal caused and the seriousness of the damage; 
but it should not impose the most serious penalties unless required 
absolutely the seriousness of the case; and cannot impose penalties 
perpetual

1350
1350. § 1 . When imposing penalties on a clergyman, it must be 
always take care that it does not lack what is necessary for its honest 
support, unless it involves expulsion from the state 
clerical
§ 2 . However, let the Ordinary try to provide in the best way 
possible to the needs of those who, having been expelled from the state 
clerical, is in a state of true indigence for reasons 
of that penalty, excluding the granting of an office, ministry or 
charge.

1351
1351. The punishment binds the offender in every place, also 
when the right of the person who constituted, imposed or declared 
the penalty, unless otherwise expressly provided.

1352
1352. § 1 . If the penalty prohibits receiving sacraments or 
sacramentals, the prohibition is suspended throughout the 
time in which the prisoner is in danger of death.
§ 2 . The obligation to 
observe a latae sententiae penalty, which has not been 
declared nor is it notorious in the place where the prisoner is located, in 
to the extent that he cannot observe it without danger of serious 
scandal or infamy.

1353
1353. The appeal or the 
appeal against judicial rulings or decrees that impose or 
declare any penalty.

1354
1354. § 1 . In addition to those listed in cc. 
1355-1356, all those who can dispense from a criminal law, or 
exempt from a precept in which a penalty is imposed, they can 
also remit that penalty.
§ 2 . The law or precept, which establishes a penalty, can also 
grant others the power to refer it.
§ 3 . If the Apostolic See reserved to itself, or to others, the 
remission of a sentence, the reservation must be strictly interpreted.

1355
1355. § 1 . They can remit a penalty established by 
law, if it is a ferendae sententiae penalty already imposed 
or of a latae sententiae penalty already declared and provided that 
is not reserved for the Apostolic See:
1st the Ordinary who promoted the trial to impose or declare the 
penalty, or imposed or declared it by decree personally or by 
middle of another;
2nd the Ordinary of the place where the offender is, 
after having consulted, however, the Ordinary of whom 
deals in no. 1st, unless this is impossible due to 
extraordinary circumstances.
§ 2 . They can remit a penalty established by law, if it is 
a latae sententiae penalty not yet declared and as long as 
that is not reserved for the Apostolic See:
1st the Ordinary to his subjects;
2nd the Ordinary of the place also to those who are in his 
territory or had committed a crime there;
3rd any Bishop, but only within sacramental confession.

1356
1356. § 1 . They can remit a ferendae or latae penalty 
sententiae established by precept that has not been given by 
the Apostolic See:
1. the author of the precept;
2nd the Ordinary who promoted the trial to impose or declare the 
penalty, or imposed or declared it by decree personally or by 
middle of another;
3rd the Ordinary of the place where the offender is located.
§ 2 . Unless it is impossible due to circumstances 
extraordinary, before proceeding with the referral you must consult 
to the one who gave the precept or to the one who imposed or declared the penalty.

1357
1357. § 1 . Without prejudice to the requirements of 
the ccs. 508 and 976, the confessor can refer in the internal forum 
sacramental censure latae sententiae of excommunication or 
I question that it has not been declared, if it is difficult for the penitent 
remain in a state of serious sin for as long as 
necessary for the competent Superior to provide.
§ 2 . When granting remission, the confessor must impose on the 
penitent the obligation to appeal within a period of one month, under penalty 
of recidivism, to the competent Superior or to a priest who has 
that power, and to abide by its mandates; meanwhile, impose a 
convenient penance and, to the extent that this is urgent, the 
reparation for scandal and damage; the appeal can be made 
also through the confessor, without indicating the name of the penitent.
§ 3 . They have the same duty to appeal, when the 
danger, who, according to c. 976, were acquitted of a censure 
imposed or declared, or reserved to the Apostolic See.

1358
1358. § 1 . Referral can only be granted for a 
censures the offender who has ceased in his contumacy, in accordance with the 
c. 1347, § 2 ; but it cannot be denied to someone who has ceased in his 
contumacy, leaving aside what is prescribed in c. 1361, § 4 .
§ 2 . Whoever sends a censure can provide according to c. 1348, or 
also impose a penance.

1359
1359. If someone is subject to several penalties, the 
referral is valid only for those that are expressed in it; 
but the general remission forgives all penalties, except 
those that the offender omitted in bad faith in the request.

1360
1360. The remission of a sentence is ipso iure invalid 
obtained through violence, serious fear or fraud.

1361
1361. § 1 . Referral may also be granted to 
who is absent, or under condition.
§ 2 . The referral in the external forum must be granted in writing, 
unless a serious cause advises otherwise.
§ 3 . The request for referral or the referral is not disclosed 
itself, except to the extent that this is useful for the good reputation 
of the prisoner, or necessary to repair the scandal.
§ 4 . Referral should not be given until, according to the prudent 
discretion of the Ordinary, the prisoner may have repaired the damage 
caused; and you may be urged to make that reparation or restitution for 
means one of the penalties listed in Can. 1336, §§ 2 -4, which 
which also applies when the censure is sent in accordance with Can. 1358 , § 1 .

1362
1362. § 1 . The criminal action is extinguished by 
prescription after three years, unless it is:
1st of the crimes reserved for the Congregation for the Doctrine of 
faith, which are subject to special rules;
2nd, the provisions of n. 1st, of the action by the 
crimes dealt with in cc. 1376, 1377, 1378, 1393, § 1 , 
1394, 1395, 1397 and 1398, § 2, which prescribes after seven years, or 
well as the action for the crimes discussed in Can. 1398, § 1, which prescribes after twenty years;
3rd of crimes not punished by common law, if the law 
individual determines another period for the prescription.
§ 2 . The time for prescription, unless established 
otherwise in the law, it begins to be counted from the day on which 
the crime was committed, or, when it is a continuing crime or 
usual, from the day on which it ceased.
§ 3 . The defendant was cited in accordance with c. 1723 or informed of the way 
provided for in c. 1507, § 3, of the presentation of the document 
accusatory pursuant to c. 1721, § 1, the 
prescription of criminal action; after this period or interrupted 
the suspension due to the cessation of criminal proceedings, again 
time runs out for the prescription, which is added to the already 
elapsed. This suspension also applies if, in compliance with the 
c. 1720, 1st, proceeds for the imposition or declaration of 
the penalty by extrajudicial decree.

1363
1363. § 1 . The action to execute the sentence is 
expires by prescription if within the deadlines established in the 
c. 1362, computed from the day on which the conviction 
becomes res judicata, the prisoner has not been notified of the decree 
execution of the judge, which is discussed in c. 1651.
§ 2 . The same applies, with due differences, when the penalty 
It is imposed by extrajudicial decree.

1364
1364. § 1 . The apostate of the faith, the heretic or the 
schismatic incur latae sententiae excommunication, remaining 
sign what is prescribed in c. 194, § 1 , 2nd; can be punished 
also with the penalties listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4.
§ 2 . If required by prolonged contumacy or the severity of the 
scandal, other penalties may be added, without excepting expulsion 
of the clerical state.

1365
1365. Who, outside the case dealt with in c. 1364, § 
1, teaches a doctrine condemned by the Roman Pontiff or by a 
Ecumenical Council or stubbornly rejects the doctrine described in 
the c. 750, § 2, or in c. 752, and, admonished by the Apostolic See 
or by the Ordinary, does not recant, be punished with a censure and 
with the deprivation of the office; Other sanctions can be added to these sanctions 
of those listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4.

1366
1366. Whoever resorts to the Ecumenical Council or the 
College of Bishops against an act of the Roman Pontiff, must be 
punished with censure.

1367
1367. The parents, or those who take their place, who 
They give their children to be baptized or educated in a 
acatholic religion, must be punished with censure or other punishment 
fair

1368
1368. Whoever, in a public spectacle or meeting, 
in a disseminated writing, or in any other way by the media 
social communication, utters a blasphemy, seriously insults 
against good customs, insults religion or the Church or 
stirs up hatred or contempt against them must be punished with a 
just penalty.

1369
1369. Whoever desecrates a sacred thing, furniture or 
property, must be punished with a fair penalty.

1370
1370. § 1 . Who physically attacks the Roman 
Pontiff, incurs latae sententiae excommunication reserved for 
the Apostolic See; if it is a clergyman, another can be added 
penalty, taking into account the seriousness of the crime, without excluding expulsion 
of the clerical state.
§ 2 . Who does the same against who has the character 
episcopal, incurs a latae sententiae interdict, and, if it is 
cleric, also in suspension latae sententiae.
§ 3 . Whoever uses physical violence against a clergyman or religious, 
or against another faithful, in contempt of the faith, the Church, the 
ecclesiastical or ministry power, must be punished with a 
just penalty.

1371
1371. § 1 . Whoever disobeys the Apostolic See, 
Ordinary or Superior when they legitimately command or prohibit something, 
and persists in his disobedience after having been admonished, 
must be punished according to the seriousness of the case with a censure, with 
deprivation of office or with other penalties listed in c. 
1336, §§ 2 -4.
§ 2 . Who violates the obligations that have been imposed on him 
as a consequence of a penalty, must be punished with penalties of the 
listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4.
§ 3 . If someone commits perjury by stating or promising something before 
an ecclesiastical authority, must be punished with a just penalty.
§ 4 . Who violates the obligation to keep the pontifical secret 
must be punished with penalties listed in c. 1336, §§ 
2 -4.
§ 5 . Whoever has not fulfilled the duty to execute the sentence 
execution, or the enforceable criminal decree, must be punished with 
a fair penalty, without excluding censorship.
§ 6 . Whoever omits the communication of the news of the crime, to the 
who was bound by canon law, must be punished according to the 
Can. 1336, §§ 2 -4, with the addition of other penalties depending on severity 
of the crime.

1372
1372. They must be punished according to c. 1336, §§ 2 -4:
1. those who impede the freedom of the ministry, or the exercise of the 
ecclesiastical power, or the legitimate use of sacred things or 
ecclesiastical property, or intimidate anyone who exercised power or 
ecclesiastical ministry;
2nd those who prevent the freedom of choice or coerce the 
elector or the chosen one.

1373
1373. Whoever publicly arouses aversion or hatred 
hatred against the Apostolic See or the Ordinary, because of some act 
of office or ecclesiastical office, or induces disobedience to them, must 
be punished with interdict or other just penalties.

1374
1374. Whoever registers in an association that 
machine against the Church must be punished with a just penalty; 
whoever promotes or directs that association must be punished with 
interdicted

1375
1375. § 1 . Whoever usurps a job 
ecclesiastic must be punished with a just penalty.
§ 2 . Illegitimate retention after 
of having been deprived of office or having ceased to hold office.

1376
1376. § 1 . He must be punished with penalties of the 
listed in the Can. 1336, §§ 2 -4, the obligation to 
repair the damage:
1st who steals ecclesiastical property or prevents it from being received 
its fruits;
2nd who, without the prescribed consultation, consensus or license, or 
either without any other requirement imposed by law for the validity or 
for legality, alienates ecclesiastical property or carries out acts of 
administration over them.
§ 2 . Be punished with a just penalty, without excluding deprivation 
of the office, the obligation to repair the damage remains firm:
1st who through his own serious fault has committed the crime of which 
deals with § 1, 2nd;
2nd who has otherwise been seriously negligent in the 
administration of ecclesiastical assets.

1377
1377. § 1 . He who gives or promises things, so that whoever 
exercises an office or function in the Church does or omits something 
illegitimately, must be punished with a just penalty according to c. 
1336, §§ 2 -4; and likewise whoever accepts those gifts or promises must 
be punished according to the seriousness of the crime, without excluding deprivation 
of the office, the obligation to repair the damage remains firm.
§ 2 . Whoever, in the exercise of his office or position, requests a 
offer higher than what is established or added sums or something in itself 
benefit is punished with an appropriate financial fine or with 
other penalties, without excluding the deprivation of the office, remaining firm 
obligation to repair the damage.

1378
1378. § 1 . Who, apart from the cases already provided 
by law, abuses ecclesiastical power, office or 
charge must be punished according to the seriousness of the act or 
omission, without excluding the deprivation of the office or position, remaining 
sign the obligation to repair the damage.
§ 2 . Whoever, through culpable negligence, performs or omits 
illegitimately, and with harm to others or scandal, an act of power 
ecclesiastical, office or position, must be punished with a 
just penalty according to c. 1336, §§ 2 -4, the obligation to 
repair the damage.

1379
1379. § 1 . Incurs latae sententiae penalty 
of interdict or, if it is a clergyman, also of suspension:
1st who, without having been promoted to the priestly order, pays attention 
perform the liturgical action of the Eucharistic Sacrifice;
2nd who, outside the case discussed in c. 1384, not being able 
validly administer sacramental absolution, attempts to give it, or 
hears a sacramental confession.
§ 2 . In the cases indicated in the § 1, other 
penalties, according to the seriousness of the crime, without excommunication.
§ 3 . Anyone who attempts to confer sacred orders on a woman, 
just as the woman who attempts to receive sacred orders incurs 
latae sententiae excommunication reserved for the Apostolic See; 
The clergyman can also be punished with expulsion from the state 
clerical
§ 4 . He who deliberately administers a sacrament to those 
are prohibited from receiving it should be punished with suspension, 
that other penalties than those listed in c. 1336, §§ 
2 -4.
§ 5 . Who, outside of the cases discussed in the §§ 1 -4 
and in c. 1384, simulates the administration of a sacrament, must be 
punished with a just sentence.

1380
1380. Whoever celebrates or receives a sacrament with 
simony, must be punished with interdict or suspension or with penalties 
of those listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4.

1381
1381. The accused of communicatio in sacris 
prohibited must be punished with a just penalty.

1382
1382. § 1 . Who throws the species to the ground 
consecrated, or taken or retained for a purpose 
sacrilegious, incurs latae sententiae excommunication reserved for 
the Apostolic See; the clergyman may also be punished with another 
punishment, without excluding expulsion from the clerical state.
§ 2 . The guilty of consecration, with a sacrilegious purpose, of a 
single matter or both in the Eucharistic celebration or outside 
she must be punished according to the seriousness of the crime, without excluding 
expulsion from the clerical state.

1383
1383. Whoever illegitimately obtains a profit with the 
stipend of the Mass, must be punished with a censure or with 
penalties of those listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4.

1384
1384. The priest who acts against what is prescribed in 
the c. 977, incurs latae sententiae excommunication reserved for 
the Apostolic See.

1385
1385. The priest who, during confession, or with 
occasion or pretext thereof, requests the penitent to commit a sin against 
the sixth commandment of the Decalogue, must be punished, according to the 
seriousness of the crime, with suspension, prohibitions or deprivations; and, 
in the most serious cases, he must be expelled from the clerical state.

1386
1386. § 1 . The confessor who directly violates the 
sacramental secrecy, incurs latae sententiae excommunication 
reserved for the Apostolic See; who violates it only indirectly, 
It must be punished in proportion to the seriousness of the crime.
§ 2 . The interpreter and those others, which are discussed in c. 
983, § 2, if they violate the secrecy, they must be punished with a penalty 
fair, without excommunication.
§ 3 . The provisions of §§ 1 and 2 remain firm, 
whoever records with any technical means, or disseminates with 
malice, on social media, things said by 
the confessor or by the penitent in a sacramental confession, 
true or feigned, must be punished according to the severity of the 
crime, without excluding, if it is a clergyman, the expulsion of the 
clerical state.

1387
1387. The Bishop who confers on someone the 
episcopal consecration without pontifical mandate, as well as that which 
receives consecration from him, they incur latae excommunication 
sententiae reserved to the Apostolic See.

1388
1388. § 1 . The Bishop who, contrary to what is prescribed in the 
c. 1105, orders a foreign subject without legitimate resignations, 
incurs a ban from ordering for one year. And who received 
the ordering, is ipso facto suspended in the order that 
received.
§ 2 . Whoever accesses sacred orders affected by censorship 
or an irregularity, voluntarily concealed, in addition to what 
established in c. 1044, § 2, 1st, is suspended ipso facto 
in the order you received.

1389
1389. Who, outside of the cases in question 
in the cc. 1379-1388, illegitimately exercises a priestly function or 
another sacred ministry, must be punished with a just penalty, without 
exclude censorship.

1390
1390. § 1 . Whoever falsely reports to a 
Ecclesiastical superior to a confessor, for the crime in question 
in the c. 1385, incurs latae sententiae interdict; and, yes 
He is a clergyman, also in suspension.
§ 2 . Who presents another complaint to the ecclesiastical Superior 
slanderous for any crime, or otherwise illegitimately injures 
the good reputation of his neighbor, must be punished with a just penalty 
according to c. 1336, §§ 2 -4, to which a censorship may be added.
§ 3 . The slanderer must also be forced to give a 
consistent satisfaction.

1391
1391. He must be punished with penalties of the 
listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4, depending on the severity of the crime:
1st who falsifies a public ecclesiastical document, or alters, 
destroys or hides a real one, or uses a false or altered one;
2nd who, in an ecclesiastical matter, uses another false document or 
altered;
3rd who states something false in a public ecclesiastical document.

1392
1392. The clergyman who voluntarily abandons 
illegitimately the sacred ministry for six continuous months, 
with the intention of evading the competent authority of the Church, 
must be punished according to the seriousness of the crime with suspension or 
also with penalties of those listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4, and in the 
More serious cases may be expelled from the clerical state.

1393
1393. § 1 . The clergyman or religious person who exercises 
commerce or business against the prescriptions of the canons 
must be punished according to the seriousness of the crime with penalties 
of those listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4.
§ 2 . The clergyman or the religious who, apart from the cases already 
provided for by law, commits a crime in economic matters, or 
seriously violates the prescriptions indicated in c. 285, § 4 , 
must be punished with penalties listed in c. 1336, §§ 
2 -4, the obligation to repair the damage remains firm.

1394
1394. § 1 . Remaining firm what the ccs prescribe. 
194, § 1, 3rd, and 694, § 1, 2nd, the clergyman who attempts a marriage, 
even if only civilly, incurs latae suspension 
sententiae; and if, after having been reprimanded, he does not change his 
behavior or continues to cause scandal, must be punished gradually 
with deprivation or even expulsion from the clerical state.
§ 2 . The religious person with perpetual vows, not a clergyman, who attempts 
contracting marriage, even if only civilly, incurs 
interdicted latae sententiae, in addition to what is established in the 
c. 694, § 1, 2nd.

1395
1395. § 1 . The concubinary cleric, apart from the case 
which is discussed in c. 1394, and the clergyman who with scandal 
remains in another external sin against the sixth commandment of the 
Decalogue, must be punished with suspension, to which, if it persists 
the offense after the warning, can be added gradually 
other penalties, up to expulsion from the clerical state.
§ 2 . A clergyman who otherwise commits a crime against the sixth 
commandment of the Decalogue, if the crime has been committed publicly, 
must be punished with just penalties, without excluding expulsion from the 
clerical state when the case requires it.
§ 3 . He must be punished with the same penalty as indicated in § 2. 
cleric who, with violence, threats or abuse of his authority, commits 
a crime against the sixth commandment of the Decalogue or obliges 
someone to perform or suffer sexual acts.

1396
1396. Whoever seriously fails to comply with the obligation to 
reside to which he is subject by reason of an ecclesiastical office, 
must be punished with a just penalty, without excluding, after the 
reprimand, deprivation of office.

1397
1397. § 1 . Who commits homicide, or kidnaps or retains 
to a human being with violence or fraud, or mutilates or injures him 
seriously, must be punished, according to the seriousness of the crime, with 
penalties of those listed in c. 1336, §§ 2 -4; the murder of the 
persons indicated in c. 1370 is punishable by penalties 
established there and also in the § 3 of this canon.
§ 2 . Whoever seeks abortion, if it occurs, incurs 
excommunication latae sententiae.
§ 3 . When it comes to crimes listed in this canon, 
In the most serious cases, the clergyman who has committed the crime must be 
expelled from the clerical state.

1398
1398. and 1395, unless in the crimes referred to in c. 1395 § 2 , the Superior judges that the resignation is not absolutely necessary and that the amendment of his subject, the restitution of justice and the reparation of the scandal can be satisfied in another way.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Editorial 
original modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Letter 
apostolic in the form of "Motu Proprio" with which the 
deadlines for filing an appeal by an expelled member of 
an institute of consecrated life, April 2, 2023)]:
1398. § 1 . Should be punished with deprivation of 
ex officio and with other just penalties, without excluding expulsion from the state 
clerical, if the case requires it, the cleric:
1st who commits a crime against the sixth commandment of the Decalogue 
with a minor or with a person who habitually has a use 
imperfect of reason or to which the law recognizes equal protection;
2nd that recruits or induces a minor, or a person who 
usually has an imperfect use of reason, or to which the 
right recognizes equal protection, so that it is shown pornographically 
or to participate in pornographic exhibitions, are true 
or simulated;
3rd that immorally obtains, preserves, exhibits or discloses, 
in any way and by any means, pornographic images of 
minors or people who habitually have imperfect use of 
the reason.
§ 2 . If a member of an institute of consecrated life or of a 
society of apostolic life, or any faithful who enjoys some 
dignity or performs an office or function in the Church, commits 
one of the crimes listed in the § 1 or in c. 1395, § 3 , must 
be punished according to c. 1336, §§ 2 -4, also adding other 
penalties according to the seriousness of the crime.

1399
1399. Apart from the cases established in this u 
other laws, the external infringement of a divine or canonical law only 
can be punished with a certainly just penalty when so 
requires the special seriousness of the infraction and the urgent need 
to prevent or repair scandals.

1400
1400. § 1 . The following are subject to trial:
1 the claim or vindication of rights of natural or legal persons, or the declaration of legal facts;
2 crimes, as regards inflicting or declaring a penalty.
§ 2 . However, disputes arising from an act of administrative power can only be brought to the Superior Court or to the administrative court.

1401
1401. The Church judges with its own and exclusive right:
1 causes that refer to spiritual things or annexed to them;

1402
1402. All the courts of the Church are governed by the canons that follow, leaving the norms of the courts of the Apostolic See safe.

1403
1403. § 1 . The causes of canonization of the Servants of God are governed by a peculiar pontifical law.
§ 2 . The provisions of this Code also apply to these causes, when that law makes reference to universal law or when it involves norms that, by their very nature, also govern those causes.

1404
1404. The First See by no one can be judged.

1405
1405. § 1 . It is the exclusive right of the Roman Pontiff to judge in the causes dealt with in c. 1401:
1 to those who exercise the supreme authority of a State;
2 to the Cardinals;
3 to the Legates of the Apostolic See and, in criminal cases, to the Bishops;
4 other causes that he himself has invoked.
§ 2 . No judge can rule on an act or instrument specifically confirmed by the Roman Pontiff, without his prior mandate.
§ 3 . It is reserved for the Roman Rota to judge:
1 to the Bishops in contentious cases, the provisions of c.
1405. § 3, as well as others that the Roman Pontiff, both motu proprio and at the request of a party, would have invoked to his court and entrusted to the Roman Rota; and, if the commission rescript does not indicate otherwise, the Rota also judges these cases in the second and subsequent instance.

1406
1406. § 1 . In case of violation of c. 1404, the minutes and decisions are considered non-existent.
§ 2 . Regarding the causes listed in c. 1405, the incompetence of the other judges is absolute.

1407
1407. § 1 . No one can be summoned in the first instance, if not before a competent ecclesiastical judge by one of the titles determined in ccs. 1408-1414.
§ 2 . The incompetence of the judge who does not enjoy any of these Titles is called relative.
§ 3 . The actor follows the jurisdiction of the defendant, and when the defendant has several jurisdictions, the actor can choose between them.

1408
1408. Anyone can be sued before the court of their domicile or quasi-domicile.

1409
1409. § 1 . The lazy person has his jurisdiction in the place where he is at that moment.
§ 2 . The person whose domicile or quasi-domicile and place of residence are unknown may be sued according to the plaintiff's jurisdiction, unless another legitimate jurisdiction applies.

1410
1410. Due to the place where the thing is located, a lawsuit may be filed before the court of the place where the object in dispute is located, provided that the action is real or involves plunder.

1411
1411. § 1 . By reason of contract, a party may be sued before the court of the place where the contract was made or where it must be performed, unless the parties, by mutual agreement, have chosen another court.
§ 2 . If the case concerns obligations that come from another Title, the party can be sued before the court of the place where the obligation arose or must be fulfilled.

1412
1412. In criminal cases, the accused, even if he is absent, may be brought before the court of the place where the crime was committed.

1413
1413. The party may be sued:
1 in cases dealing with administration, before the court of the place where it was carried out;
2 in cases that refer to inheritances or legacies, before the court of the last domicile or quasi-domicile, or place of residence, in accordance with cc. 1408-1409, of the one whose inheritance or pious legacy is in question, unless the issue refers to the mere execution of the legacy, which must be processed according to the ordinary rules of jurisdiction.

1414
1414. Due to the connection, the same court and in the same process must judge the cases related to each other, unless prevented by a legal provision.

1415
1415. For reasons of prevention, when two or more courts are equally competent, the one that first legitimately summoned the defendant has the right to judge the case.

1416
1416. Conflicts of jurisdiction between courts subject to the same court of appeal must be resolved by it; If they are not subject to the same court of appeal, the Apostolic Signature resolves.

1417
1417. § 1 . Due to the primacy of the Roman Pontiff, any faithful can bring or introduce a case before the Holy See, both contentious and criminal, at any stage of the trial and whatever the state of the dispute.
§ 2 . However, outside of the case of appeal, this petition filed with the Apostolic See does not suspend the exercise of the jurisdiction of the judge who has already begun to deal with the case; The latter, therefore, may continue the trial until the final sentence, unless the Apostolic See informs the judge that he has taken the case to himself.

1418
1418. Every court has the right to request the help of another court for the investigation of the case or to make judicial summonses.

1419
1419. § 2 ;
2 to the Primate Abbot, to the Superior Abbot of a monastic congregation, and to the Superior General of religious institutes of pontifical right;
3 to dioceses or other ecclesiastical persons, both physical and legal, who have no Superior below the Roman Pontiff.
1419. § 1 . In each diocese, and for all causes not expressly excepted by law, the judge of first instance is the diocesan Bishop, who may exercise judicial power by himself or through others in accordance with the canons that follow.
§ 2 . However, when it comes to rights or temporal goods of a legal person represented by the Bishop, the court of appeal judges in the first degree.

1420
1420. § 1 . Every diocesan Bishop must appoint a judicial Vicar or Official with ordinary power to judge, distinct from the Vicar General, unless the size of the diocese or the scarcity of causes advise otherwise.
§ 2 . The judicial Vicar constitutes a single court with the Bishop, but cannot judge cases that the Bishop has reserved for himself.
§ 3 . The judicial Vicar may be appointed assistants called Deputy Judicial Vicars or Vice Officials.
§ 4 . Both the Judicial Vicar and the Deputy Judicial Vicars must be priests, of good reputation, doctors or at least graduates in canon law and at least thirty years of age.
§ 5 . When the see becomes vacant, such judicial Vicars do not cease in office nor can they be removed by the diocesan Administrator; but they need to be confirmed when the new Bishop takes office.
1420. § 5, and cannot be removed unless it is for legitimate and serious cause.

1421
1421. § 1 . The Bishop must appoint diocesan judges in the diocese, who are clerics.
§ 2 . The Episcopal Conference can also allow lay people to be appointed judges, one of whom, if necessary, can join the collegiate court.
§ 3 . The judges must be of good reputation, doctors or at least graduates in canon law.

1422
1422. The judicial Vicar, the deputy judicial Vicars and the other judges are appointed for a specific period, remaining in place what is prescribed by the c

1423
1423. § 1 . Replacing the diocesan courts, mentioned in ccs. 1419-1421, several diocesan Bishops, with the approval of the Apostolic See, may constitute by common agreement a single court of first instance for their dioceses; In this case, the group of Bishops or the Bishop designated by them have all the powers that correspond to the diocesan Bishop over his court.
§ 2 . The courts referred to in § 1 may be established for all cases or only for a specific class of cases.

1424
1424. In any trial, the sole judge may use two advisors, clerics or laymen of upright life, to help him with their advice.

1425
1425. § 1 . The contrary custom being disapproved, they are reserved to a collegiate court of three judges:
1 contentious causes: a) on the bond of sacred ordination; b) on the bond of marriage, remaining in force what is prescribed in cc. 1686 and 1688;
2 criminal cases: a) on crimes that can be punished by expulsion from the clerical state; b) if it involves inflicting or declaring an excommunication.
§ 2 . The Bishop may entrust the most difficult or most important cases to a college of three or five judges.
§ 3 . To judge each case, the Judicial Vicar will call the judges in turn, unless in a specific case the Bishop establishes otherwise.
§ 4 . If it is not possible to constitute a collegiate court in the first degree of trial, the Episcopal Conference may allow, while this impossibility lasts, the Bishop to entrust the cases to a single clerical judge, who, where possible, uses the collaboration of an advisor and an auditor.
§ 5 . Once the judges are appointed, the Judicial Vicar must not change them, except for very serious reasons, which must be stated in the decree.
1425. § 4, the court of second instance must act collegially.
1425. § 1 .
2 does not contain the reasons or reasons for the decision;
3 lacks the signatures prescribed by law;
4 does not bear an indication of the year, month, day and place in which it was issued;
5 is based on a judicial act affected by a nullity that has not been corrected in accordance with c. 1619;
6 was given against a legitimately absent party, in accordance with c.

1426
1426. § 1 . The collegiate court must proceed collegially, and issue a sentence by majority vote.
§ 2 . To the extent possible, it must be presided over by the Judicial Vicar or an Assistant Judicial Vicar.

1427
1427. § 1 . Unless the constitutions provide otherwise, when a controversy arises between religious or houses of the same clerical religious institute of pontifical right, the judge of first instance is the Provincial Superior or, if it is an autonomous monastery, the local Abbot.
§ 2 . Unless the constitutions prescribe otherwise, if the conflict occurs between two provinces, it will be judged in the first instance by the Superior General, personally or through a delegate; and the Superior Abbot of the monastic Congregation, if the dispute is between two monasteries.
§ 3 . Finally, the diocesan court judges in the first instance disputes between natural or legal religious persons of various religious institutes, or also of the same clerical or lay institute of diocesan law, or between a religious person and a secular clergyman or a layman or a non-religious legal person.

1428
1428. § 1 . The judge, or the president of the collegiate court, may appoint an auditor to carry out the investigation of the case, choosing him from among the judges of the court or among the people approved by the Bishop for this function.
§ 2 . For the position of auditor, the Bishop can approve clerics or lay people, who stand out for their good habits, prudence and doctrine.
§ 3 . The auditor is only responsible for collecting the evidence and delivering it to the judge, according to his mandate; and if not prohibited by the mandate, he can provisionally decide what evidence is to be collected and in what way, in the event that these issues are discussed while carrying out his task.

1429
1429. The president of the collegiate court must appoint a rapporteur or rapporteur among the judges of the college, who will inform the court meeting about the case and will write the sentence in writing; The president may replace him with another, when there is just cause.

1430
1430. For contentious cases in which the public good is involved, and for criminal cases, a promoter of justice must be established in the diocese, who by office is obliged to ensure the public good.

1431
1431. § 1 . In contentious cases, it is up to the diocesan Bishop to judge whether or not the public good is at stake, unless the intervention of the promoter of justice is prescribed by law or is evidently necessary due to the nature of the matter.
§ 2 . If the promoter of justice had intervened in the preceding instance, it is presumed that his intervention is necessary at the next level.

1432
1432. For cases in which the annulment of sacred ordination or the annulment or dissolution of a marriage is discussed, a defender of the bond must be appointed in the diocese, who, by office, must propose and express everything that can reasonably be argued against the annulment or dissolution.

1433
1433. In those cases that require the presence of the promoter of justice or the defender of the bond, if they have not been cited, the acts are null, unless, however, they are actually present or, at least, they have been able to fulfill their mission before the sentence, through the examination of the minutes.

1434
1434. Unless otherwise expressly established:
1 when the law mandates that the judge hear the parties or one of them, the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond must also be heard, if they intervene in the trial;
2 when a party's request is required so that the judge can decide something, the request of the promoter of justice or the defender of the bond has the same value, if they intervene in the trial.

1435
1435. It is the responsibility of the Bishop to appoint the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond, who must be clerics or laymen of good repute, doctors or graduates in canon law and of proven prudence and zeal for justice.

1436
1436. § 1 . The same person can perform the role of promoter of justice and defender of the bond but not in the same cause.
§ 2 . The promoter and the defender can be established for all the causes in general or for each of them in particular; and may be removed by the Bishop for just cause.

1437
1437. § 1 . A notary must intervene in every process, so the minutes are void if they are not signed by him.
§ 2 . The minutes drawn up by a notary become public evidence.

1438
1438. Remaining in place what is prescribed in the c
1438. and 1439, the judge's incompetence is absolute.
1438. and 1439.
§ 2 . If another party appeals to a different court, the case will be resolved by the court with a higher degree, subject to what is prescribed in c. 1415.

1439
1439. § 1 . Yes, according to c. 1423, there is a single court of first instance for several dioceses, the Episcopal Conference, with the approval of the Apostolic See, must establish a court of second instance, unless all those dioceses are suffragans of the same archdiocese.
§ 2 . The Episcopal Conference may establish one or more courts of second instance, with the approval of the Apostolic See, even outside the cases provided for in the § 1.
§ 3 . Regarding the courts of second instance referred to in §§ 1 -2, the Episcopal Conference or the Bishop designated by it has all the powers that correspond to the diocesan Bishop over his court.
1439. § 3, the appeal court is subject.
§ 3 . Among religious, the execution of the sentence corresponds to the Superior who dictated it or who appointed the delegate judge.

1440
1440. If competition is not observed due to the degree, in accordance with the cc

1441
1441. The court of second instance must be constituted in the same way as the court of first instance. But if in the first degree of the trial a single judge handed down a sentence, according to the c

1442
1442. The Roman Pontiff is supreme judge for the entire Catholic world and dictates judgment either personally, or through the ordinary courts of the Apostolic See, or by judges to whom he delegates.

1443
1443. The Roman Rota is the ordinary tribunal constituted by the Roman Pontiff to receive appeals.

1444
1444. § 1, 1:
1 from the court of a suffragan Bishop, appeal is made to that of the Metropolitan, except as indicated in c. 1439;
2 when the case is heard in the first instance before the Metropolitan, the appeal is filed before the court that he himself has designated in a stable manner, with the approval of the Apostolic See;
3 for cases dealt with before the Provincial Superior, the court of second instance is that of the Superior General; for cases brought before the local Abbot, it is the court of the superior Abbot of the monastic congregation.
1444. § 1 . The Roman Rota judges:
1 in the second instance, cases decided by ordinary courts of first instance and that have been elevated to the Holy See by legitimate appeal;
2 in the third or subsequent instance, cases already judged by the same Roman Rota or by any other court, unless they have become res judicata.
§ 2 . This court also judges in the first instance the cases provided for in c.

1445
1445. § 1 . The Supreme Court of the Apostolic Signature judges:
1 complaints for annulment and requests for restitution in integrum and other appeals against rotational sentences;
2 appeals in cases regarding the status of persons whom the Roman Rota refuses to admit for new examination;
3 the exceptions of suspicion and other causes against the Auditors of the Roman Rota for acts carried out in the exercise of their function;
4 the conflicts of jurisdiction referred to in c. 1416.
§ 2 . This same Court settles disputes arising from an act of ecclesiastical administrative power that are legitimately brought to it, as well as other administrative controversies that have been referred to it by the Roman Pontiff or by the dicasteries of the Roman Curia, and conflicts of jurisdiction between said dicasteries.
§ 3 . It also corresponds to this Supreme Court:
1 monitor the proper administration of justice and determine that proceedings be taken against lawyers or attorneys, if necessary;
2 extend the jurisdiction of the courts;
3 promote and approve the erection of the courts referred to in the ccs. 1423 and 1439.

1446
1446. § 1 . All the faithful, and first of all the Bishops, must diligently ensure that, without prejudice to justice, disputes among the people of God are avoided as much as possible and settled peacefully as soon as possible.
§ 2 . At the beginning of the litigation, and at any other time, whenever there is some hope of success, the judge will not fail to exhort and help the parties to try by common agreement to seek an equitable solution to their controversy, and will indicate to them the appropriate means to achieve this end, even resorting to serious people as mediators.
§ 3 . But when the dispute concerns the private good of the parties, the judge considers whether it can usefully be concluded by transaction or by arbitration judgment in accordance with the ccs. 1713-1716.
1446. § 2 proves useless, if the judge considers that the claim has some basis, he will order within three days, by means of a decree recorded at the bottom of the document, that a copy of it be sent to the defendant, granting him the power to send his written responses to the chancery of the court within a period of fifteen days.
§ 2 . This notification produces the effects of the judicial summons indicated in c. 1512.

1447
1447. Whoever has intervened in a case as a judge, promoter of justice, defender of the bond, attorney, lawyer, witness or expert, cannot later validly define the same case as a judge in another instance or perform the office of advisor.

1448
1448. § 1 . The judge does not accept to hear a case in which he has an interest by reason of consanguinity or affinity in any degree of straight line and up to the fourth degree of collateral line, or by reason of guardianship or curatorship, intimate friendship, great aversion, obtaining a profit or preventing harm.
§ 2 . In the same circumstances, the promoter of justice, the defender of the bond, the advisor and the auditor must refrain from carrying out their duties.

1449
1449. § 1 . In the cases indicated in c. 1448, if the judge himself does not recuse himself, the party may challenge him.
§ 2 . The judicial Vicar decides on the challenge; and, if he himself is challenged, the Bishop who presides over the tribunal decides.
§ 3 . If the Bishop himself acts as judge and is challenged, he must refrain from judging.
§ 4 . If the challenge is opposed against the promoter of justice, the defender of the bond or another minister of the court, the president of the collegiate court, or the judge, if it is the only one, decides on said exception.

1450
1450. Once the challenge is admitted, the persons must be changed, but without changing the degree of the trial.

1451
1451. § 1 . The challenge must be resolved as quickly as possible by hearing the parties and the promoter of justice or the defender of the bond, if they participate in the trial and are not themselves the ones challenged.
§ 2 . The acts carried out by the judge before being challenged are valid; but those carried out after the challenge was filed must be rescinded, if the party requests it within a period of ten days from when the challenge was admitted.

1452
1452. § 1 . In matters that are of interest only to individuals, the judge can only proceed at the request of a party. But, once a criminal case or other case that refers to the public good of the Church or the salvation of souls has been legitimately introduced, the judge can, and even must, proceed ex officio.
§ 2 . The judge may also compensate for the negligence of the parties in presenting evidence or raising exceptions, whenever he considers it necessary to avoid a seriously unjust sentence, remaining firm the prescriptions of c. 1600.

1453
1453. Judges and courts must ensure that, without loss of justice, all cases are completed as soon as possible, and that they do not last more than one year in the court of first instance, nor more than six months in the court of second instance.

1454
1454. All those who are part of the court or collaborate with it must take an oath that they will carry out their task correctly and faithfully.

1455
1455. § 1 . Judges and court assistants are obliged to maintain ex officio secrecy in all criminal trials, and also in litigation when some harm may result for the parties from the disclosure of any procedural act.
§ 2 . Without prejudice to the provisions of c.

1456
1456. The judge and all court ministers are prohibited from accepting gifts of any kind on the occasion of judicial proceedings.

1457
1457. § 1 . Judges who refuse to administer justice even though they are certainly and evidently competent, or who declare themselves competent without any legal title that legitimizes that competence, and hear and decide the cases, or violate the law of secrecy, or through fraud or gross negligence cause other damage to the parties, may be punished with appropriate penalties by the competent authority, including deprivation of office.
§ 2 . The ministers and assistants of the court are subject to the same sanctions if they fail in their duty, as indicated above; The judge can also punish all of these.

1458
1458. The causes must be heard following the same order in which they were proposed and registered, unless one of them requires a faster expedition than the others, which must be determined by special reasoned decree.

1459
1459. § 1 . Those defects from which the annulment of the sentence may result can be proposed as an exception or raised ex officio by the judge at any phase or level of the trial.
§ 2 . Outside of the cases indicated in the § 1, dilatory exceptions, and especially those that refer to the persons and the manner of the trial, must be proposed before the litigation, unless they arise after it has taken place, and must be decided as soon as possible.

1460
1460. § 1 . If the exception is proposed against the jurisdiction of the judge, the decision corresponds to the same judge.
§ 2 . In case of exception of relative incompetence, if the judge declares himself competent, his decision does not allow appeal, but a complaint for annulment and restitution in integrum can be proposed.
§ 3 . If the judge declares himself incompetent, the party that considers itself harmed may appeal to the court of appeal within a period of fifteen business days.

1461
1461. At any stage of the case, the judge who recognizes his absolute incompetence must declare it.

1462
1462. § 1 . The exceptions of res judicata, compromise and other peremptory ones that are called "finished litigation" must be proposed and dealt with before the litigation is filed; Whoever proposes them later must not be rejected, but must be ordered to pay the costs, unless he proves that he has not maliciously delayed the opposition.
§ 2 . The other peremptory exceptions must be proposed in the answer to the claim, and must be dealt with at the appropriate time, according to the rules of incidental issues.

1463
1463. § 1 . Counterclaims can only be validly proposed within a period of thirty days from the response to the claim.
§ 2 . They must be treated at the same time as the conventional action, that is, at the same pace as it, unless it is necessary to hear it separately or the judge considers that this is more appropriate.

1464
1464. Questions regarding the provision of security regarding the payment of judicial costs, or the granting of free sponsorship, if it has already been requested from the first moment, and other similar matters, must ordinarily be dealt with before the response is filed.

1465
1465. § 1 . The so-called fatal deadlines, that is, the deadlines determined by law for the expiration of rights, cannot be extended, nor can they validly be shortened, except at the request of the parties.
§ 2 . However, judicial and conventional deadlines, before their expiration, may be extended by the judge when there is a just cause, having heard the parties or at their request; but they can never be validly abbreviated, except with the consent of the parties.
§ 3 . The judge should take care, however, that the litigation does not drag on too long due to the extension.

1466
1466. When the law does not establish deadlines for carrying out procedural acts, the judge must determine them, taking into account the nature of each act.

1467
1467. If the court is closed on the day designated for a judicial act, the deadline is understood to be extended to the first business day.

1468
1468. Every court must have, as far as possible, a fixed headquarters, which will be open at specific times.

1469
1469. § 1 . The judge forcibly expelled from his territory or prevented from exercising his jurisdiction therein, may exercise it outside the territory and issue a sentence, but informing the diocesan Bishop.
§ 2 . In addition to what was said in § 1, the judge, for just cause and after hearing the parties, may leave his own territory to collect evidence, but with the license of the diocesan Bishop of the place to which he is going and at the headquarters determined by him.
1469. § 2 .

1470
1470. § 1 . If a particular law does not provide otherwise, while the case is being heard in court, only those who the law or the judge determines are necessary to carry out the process should be present in the courtroom.
§ 2 . The judge may force those who attend the trial and seriously lack the respect and obedience due to the court to observe proper conduct with proportionate penalties; and, in addition, lawyers and attorneys can be suspended from the exercise of their function before ecclesiastical courts.

1471
1471. If a person who is to be interrogated uses a language unknown to the judge or the parties, a sworn interpreter, designated by the judge, must be used. However, the statements must be recorded in writing in the original language, adding the translation. An interpreter will also be used when a deaf or mute person must be questioned, unless the judge prefers that he respond in writing to the questions presented.

1472
1472. § 1 . Judicial acts must be drafted in writing, whether they refer to the substance of the dispute, or to acts of the case, or to the manner of proceeding, or acts of the process.
§ 2 . Each sheet of the minutes must be numbered and authenticated.

1473
1473. When the signature of the parties or witnesses is required in the judicial minutes, if the party or the witness cannot or does not want to sign, this must be recorded in the same minutes, and at the same time the judge and the notary will attest that this record has been read in its entirety to the party or the witness and that neither the party nor the witness could or wanted to sign.

1474
1474. § 1 . In the event of an appeal, a copy of the records must be sent to the higher court, with the notary attesting to their authenticity.
§ 2 . If the records are written in a language unknown to the superior court, they must be translated into another language known to it, taking precautions to ensure the fidelity of the translation.

1475
1475. § 1 . At the end of the trial, the documents that belong to them must be returned to the individuals, although a copy of them must be preserved.
§ 2 . Without a judge's order, notaries and the chancellor are prohibited from providing a copy of the court records and documents that are part of the process.

1476
1476. Any person, whether baptized or not, may sue in court; and the legitimately sued party has the obligation to respond.

1477
1477. Even if the plaintiff or the defendant appoints a solicitor or lawyer, they have the obligation to personally attend the trial whenever the law or the judge prescribes it.

1478
1478. § 1 . Minors and those who lack the use of reason can only appear in court through their parents, guardians or curators, except as prescribed in § 3.
§ 2 . If the judge considers that the rights of minors are in conflict with those of their parents, guardians or curators, or that they cannot sufficiently protect their rights, they will appear in court through a guardian or curator designated by the judge.
§ 3 . However, in spiritual cases and those related to them, minors who have reached the use of reason can sue and answer for themselves, without the consent of the parents and guardian, if they have reached the age of fourteen; If not, they must do so through a curator appointed by the judge.
§ 4 . Those who suffer property interdiction or a mental disorder can only appear in court to answer for their own crimes or by order of the judge; In other cases, they must sue and respond through their guardians.

1479
1479. When the civil authority has already appointed a guardian or curator, this can be admitted by the ecclesiastical judge, after hearing, if possible, the diocesan Bishop of the one to whom it was given; but if it is not appointed or if it is considered that it should not be admitted, the judge will appoint a guardian or curator for the case.

1480
1480. § 1 . Legal entities act in the trial through their legitimate representatives.
§ 2 . But if they do not have a representative or the latter is negligent, the Ordinary can act in court, by himself or by another, on behalf of the legal entities that are under his jurisdiction.

1481
1481. § 1 . The party may freely designate its lawyer and attorney; but, except in the cases indicated in §§ 2 -3, you can also sue and respond personally, unless the judge considers the help of the procurator or lawyer necessary.
§ 2 . In a criminal trial, the accused must always have a lawyer, chosen by him or herself or appointed by the judge.
§ 3 . In the contentious trial, if it involves minors or a trial in which the public good comes into play, with the exception of matrimonial cases, the judge must appoint a defender ex officio to the party that does not have one.
1481. §§ 1 and 3, the instance is meanwhile suspended.
§ 2 . The judge must appoint another guardian or curator as soon as possible; and may also constitute a solicitor for the case, if the party does not do so within the short period to be determined by the same judge.
1481. § 1, within the period determined by the same judge.
§ 2 . If the prisoner does not name him, the judge himself must appoint him a lawyer before the answer to the complaint, who will remain in office as long as the prisoner does not name another.

1482
1482. § 1 . Each litigant can appoint only one attorney, who cannot be replaced by another, if that power is not expressly granted.
§ 2 . However, when a person appoints several attorneys for just cause, he or she will do so in such a way that there is room for prevention among them.
§ 3 . Several lawyers can be appointed at the same time.

1483
1483. The procurator and the lawyer must be of legal age and of good reputation; Furthermore, the lawyer must be Catholic, unless the diocesan Bishop allows otherwise, and a doctor, or, at least, truly expert in canon law, and have the approval of the Bishop himself.

1484
1484. § 1 . The procurator and the lawyer, before beginning their function, must present their authentic mandate to the court.
§ 2 . However, to prevent the extinction of a right, the judge may admit a solicitor even if he does not present the mandate, requiring due guarantee, if he deems it appropriate; but the act is absolutely ineffective if the attorney does not present the legitimate mandate within the peremptory period set by the judge.

1485
1485. Without a special mandate, the attorney cannot validly renounce the action, the instance or the judicial acts; nor carry out a transaction, pact or arbitration commitment, nor, in general, that for which the law requires a special mandate.

1486
1486. § 1 . For the removal of the attorney or attorney to take effect, it is necessary that he be notified and, if the complaint has already been answered, that the judge and the opposing party be notified of the removal.
§ 2 . After the final sentence, the attorney continues to have the right and obligation to appeal, as long as the principal does not object.

1487
1487. Both the procurator and the lawyer can be rejected by the judge by decree, both ex officio and at the request of a party, but always for serious reasons.

1488
1488. § 1 . Both are prohibited from buying the lawsuit, or agreeing on excessive emoluments or on a claimed part of the disputed item. If they do that, the agreement is void, and they may be fined by the judge. In addition, the lawyer may be suspended from his office or, if he is a repeat offender, eliminated from the list of lawyers by the Bishop who presides over the court.
§ 2 . In the same way, lawyers and attorneys who, by fraud of law, remove cases from the competent courts so that they can be sentenced by others in a more favorable manner can be punished.

1489
1489. Lawyers and attorneys who, due to gifts or promises or for any other reason, violate their office, must be suspended from their sponsorship and punished with a fine or other proportionate penalties.

1490
1490. To the extent possible, in every court there must be stable patrons, who receive their fees from the court itself, and who perform the function of lawyer or attorney, especially in matrimonial cases, in favor of the parties who freely prefer to appoint them.

1491
1491. Every right is protected not only by an action, as long as nothing else is expressly established, but also by an exception.

1492
1492. § 1 . Every action is extinguished by prescription according to law, or in another legitimate manner, except those that refer to the state of persons, which are never extinguished.
§ 2 . Except as prescribed in c. 1462, the exception can always be opposed, and is perpetual by nature.

1493
1493. The actor may bring several actions against someone at the same time, as long as they do not conflict with each other, on the same matter or on several, as long as they do not exceed the jurisdiction of the court to which he or she goes.

1494
1494. § 1 . The defendant may propose a counterclaim against the plaintiff before the same judge and in the same trial, either due to the connection of the case with the main action, or to neutralize or reduce the plaintiff's request.
§ 2 . Counterclaim against counterclaim is not admissible.

1495
1495. The counterclaim action must be proposed to the judge before whom the preceding action was presented, even if he is delegated only for one case or is otherwise affected by relative incompetence.

1496
1496. § 1 . He who makes it appear at least with probable arguments that he has the right to something that is in the possession of another, and that harm may be caused if it is not taken into custody, has the right to obtain from the judge the seizure of the same thing.
§ 2 . In similar circumstances, you can claim that another be prohibited from exercising a right.

1497
1497. § 1 . The seizure of a thing to secure a credit is also permitted, as long as the creditor's right is sufficiently established.
§ 2 . The embargo can also extend to the debtor's assets that are under any title in the possession of other people, as well as to the debtor's credits.

1498
1498. In no way can the seizure of a thing or the inhibition of the exercise of a right be decreed if the damage feared can be repaired in another way and a suitable guarantee is offered for its repair.

1499
1499. Anyone to whom the judge grants the seizure of a thing or the inhibition of the exercise of a right may require a prior guarantee for compensation for damages, in the event that he or she does not prove that he or she has the right.

1500
1500. Regarding the nature and effects of the possessory action, the rules of civil law of the place where the thing whose possession is disputed is located must be observed.

1501
1501. The judge cannot judge any case if the interested party or the promoter of justice has not made a request in accordance with the canons.

1502
1502. Whoever wishes to sue someone must present a document to the competent judge indicating the object of the controversy and requesting the judge's authority.
1502. and 1504.
§ 2 . Before the superior court, the promoter of justice of that same court plays the role of actor.

1503
1503. § 1 . The judge may admit an oral request when the actor is unable to present it in writing, or if it is a cause that is easy to investigate and of little importance.
§ 2 . However, in both cases the judge will order the notary to draw up a record, which must be read to the actor and approved by him, and which replaces the actor's writing for all legal purposes.

1504
1504. The statement of claim must:
1 specify before which judge the case is brought, what is requested and against whom;
2 indicate what law the actor relies on and, at least in general terms, what facts and evidence he relies on to prove what he claims;
3 be signed by the plaintiff or his attorney, indicating the day, month and year, as well as the place where they live or say they have residence for the purposes of receiving documents;
4 indicate the domicile or quasi-domicile of the defendant.

1505
1505. § 1 . The single judge or the president of the collegiate court, after verifying that the matter is within his jurisdiction and that the plaintiff has the legal capacity to act in court, must admit or reject the document of claim as soon as possible, by decree.
§ 2 . The statement of claim can only be rejected:
1 if the judge or court is incompetent;
2 if it is certain that the actor lacks procedural capacity;
3 if what is mandated by c. 1504, 1-3;
4 if from the same document of claim it is deduced with certainty that the petition lacks any foundation and that no foundation can be expected to emerge from the process.
§ 3 . If the document has been rejected due to defects that can be corrected, the plaintiff can present a new, correctly written one before the same judge.
§ 4 . Within the useful period of ten days, the party may file a reasoned appeal against the rejection of the writing before the court of appeal, or before the college if it was rejected by the president; and the question of rejection must be decided as quickly as possible.

1506
1506. If within one month from when the document of claim was presented the judge does not issue a decree admitting or rejecting it in accordance with c. 1505, the interested party can urge the judge to fulfill his obligation; and if, despite everything, the judge remains silent, ten days have passed unnecessarily since the application was filed, the document of claim is considered admitted.

1507
1507. § 1 . In the decree by which the plaintiff's claim is admitted, the judge or president must call the trial or summon the other parties to answer the claim, determining whether they should respond in writing or appear before him to resolve the doubts. And if, based on the written responses, he deduces the need to convene the parties, he can order it by means of a new decree.
§ 2 . If the claim is considered admitted pursuant to c. 1506, the decree summoning a trial must be given within a period of twenty days from the date the instance mentioned in that canon was presented.
§ 3 . When the litigants actually appear before the judge to discuss the case, a summons is not necessary; but the actuary must record in the minutes that the parties were present.
1507. § 3 .
1507. § 1, the judge must declare him absent from the trial and order that the case, observing what is ordered, continue until the final sentence and its execution.
§ 2 . Before giving the decree referred to in § 1, it must be stated, reiterating if necessary the summons, that the legitimately issued one reached the defendant in a timely manner.

1508
1508. § 1 . The decree of judicial summons must be notified immediately to the defendant, and at the same time to those others who must appear.
§ 2 . The statement of claim must be attached to the summons, unless, for serious reasons, the judge considers that it should not be made known to the party before he or she testifies at trial.
§ 3 . If a person is sued who does not have the free exercise of their rights or the free administration of the things being litigated, the summons must be made, as the case may be, to the guardian, curator, special attorney or to the one who, according to the law, is obliged to assume the trial on their behalf.

1509
1509. § 1 . The notification of summonses, decrees, sentences and other judicial acts must be done through the public postal service or by another very secure procedure, observing the rules established by particular law.
§ 2 . The notification and the manner in which it was made must be recorded in the minutes.

1510
1510. The defendant who refuses to receive the summons card, or who prevents it from reaching his hands, must be considered legitimately summoned.

1511
1511. If the summons is not legitimately notified, the acts of the process are null and void, except as prescribed by the c

1512
1512. Once the summons has been legitimately notified or the parties have appeared before the judge to discuss the case:
1 the thing ceases to be whole;
2 the case becomes the responsibility of that judge or the court before which the action has been brought, as long as they are competent;
3 the jurisdiction of the delegated judge is consolidated, in such a way that it is not extinguished when the right of the delegated judge ceases;
4 the prescription is interrupted, if nothing else has been established;
5 the lis pendens begins, and, therefore, the principle "while the litigation is pending, nothing should be innovated" is immediately applied.

1513
1513. § 1 . The litiscontestation occurs when, by decree of the judge, the limits of the controversy are set, taken from the requests and responses of the parties.
§ 2 . The requests and responses of the parties can be made not only in the document of claim, but also in the response to the summons or in oral statements made before the judge; But, in the most difficult cases, the parties must be summoned by the judge to agree on the doubt or doubts that must be answered in the sentence.
§ 3 . The parties must be notified of the judge's decree; and, if they do not agree, they can appeal within ten days, to modify it, before the same judge, who must decide the issue by decree very quickly.
1513. § 1 and 1639 § 1, we must proceed to the discussion of the case and the sentence.

1514
1514. The terms of the controversy, once defined, cannot be validly modified, except by means of a new decree, for serious reasons, at the request of one party and after hearing the rest, whose reasons must be duly considered.

1515
1515. Litigation interrupts the good faith of the possessor of another's property; Therefore, if he is sentenced to restitution, he must also return the fruits and compensate for the damages caused since that moment.

1516
1516. After the response, the judge will set a convenient time for the parties to propose and carry out the tests.

1517
1517. The instance begins with the summons; concludes not only by the final sentence, but also in other ways established by law.

1518
1518. When a litigant dies, or changes state, or ceases in the office for which he acts:
1 if the case has not yet concluded, the instance is suspended until it is resumed by the heir of the deceased or his successor or the legitimately interested party;
2 if the case is concluded, the judge must continue it, summoning the attorney; and if there is not one, to the heir of the deceased or his successor.

1519
1519. § 1 . If the guardian or curator or the attorney required by the c

1520
1520. The instance expires when, without an impediment, the parties do not carry out any procedural act for six months. Other expiration periods may be established by particular law.

1521
1521. Expiry takes place ipso iure and against everyone, even against minors and those equal to them, and must also be declared ex officio, leaving aside the right to request compensation from guardians, curators, administrators or attorneys who do not prove they are free of fault.

1522
1522. Expiration extinguishes the minutes of the process, but not those of the cause; Furthermore, these can also be effective in another instance, as long as the litigation takes place between the same people and on the same object; but, in relation to strangers, they only have the value of documents.

1523
1523. If the trial expires, each of the litigants will have to bear the expenses incurred.

1524
1524. § 1 . The actor may waive the instance at any stage and level of the trial; Likewise, both the actor and the defendant can renounce the acts of the process, either all or only some of them.
§ 2 . In order to renounce the request, the guardians and administrators of legal entities need the advice or consent of those whose participation is necessary to carry out acts that exceed the limits of ordinary administration.
§ 3 . For the waiver to be valid, it must be made in writing, which will be signed by the party themselves, or by their attorney with a special mandate; It must be notified to the other party, and be accepted, or at least not challenged by it, and admitted by the judge.

1525
1525. The waiver accepted by the judge produces the same effects on the waived acts as the expiration of the instance; and also obliges the renouncer to bear the costs of the acts he has renounced.

1526
1526. § 1 . The burden of proof lies with the person who affirms.
§ 2 . No proof needed:
1 those things that the law itself presumes;
2 the facts affirmed by one of the contenders and admitted by the other, unless despite this the law or the judge requires proof.

1527
1527. § 1 . Any evidence that is considered useful to elucidate the cause and that is lawful may be provided.
§ 2 . If a party insists that evidence rejected by the judge be admitted, the same judge must decide the issue as quickly as possible.

1528
1528. If a party or witness refuses to appear before the judge to respond, they may also be heard through a layman designated by the judge, or their statement may be required before a notary public or by another legitimate means.

1529
1529. If it is not for serious reasons, the judge does not proceed to collect evidence before filing the response.

1530
1530. To better discover the truth, the judge can question the parties at any time, and must even do so at the request of a party or to prove a fact that is in the public interest to leave beyond all doubt.

1531
1531. § 1 . The legitimately questioned party must respond and tell the whole truth.
§ 2 . If you refuse to respond, it is up to the judge to evaluate that attitude in order to prove the facts.

1532
1532. When the public good comes into play in a case, the judge must ask the parties to swear that they will tell the truth, or at least that what they have said is true, unless a serious case advises otherwise; In other cases, you can do so, according to your prudence.

1533
1533. The parties, the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond may present to the judge articles or questions about which the party must be questioned.

1534
1534. For the interrogation of the parties, the rules established regarding witnesses in the CC must be observed.

1535
1535. Judicial confession is the written or oral statement about some fact before the competent judge, expressed by one of the parties about the subject matter of the trial and against itself, both spontaneously and in response to questions from the judge.

1536
1536. § 1 . The judicial confession of one of the parties, when it is a private matter and the public good is not at stake, relieves the others of the burden of proof.
§ 2 . However, in cases that affect the public good, the judicial confession and the statements of the parties that are not confessions may have probative force, which the judge must evaluate together with the other circumstances of the case, but they cannot be attributed full evidentiary force, unless other elements fully corroborate them.
1536. § 2 .

1537
1537. Regarding the extrajudicial confession brought to the trial, it is up to the judge, weighing all the circumstances, to estimate what value should be attributed to it.

1538
1538. The confession or any other statement of a party has no value if it is established that it has been issued by mistake of fact or extracted by violence or serious fear.

1539
1539. In all types of trials, evidence is admitted through documents, both public and private.

1540
1540. § 1 . Public ecclesiastical documents are those that have been drawn up by a public person in the exercise of his function in the Church and observing the solemnities prescribed by law.
§ 2 . Public civil documents are those that, according to the laws of each place, are recognized as such.
§ 3 . The other documents are private.

1541
1541. Unless otherwise stated by contrary and obvious arguments, public documents attest to everything that is directly and mainly stated in them.

1542
1542. The private document, both the one issued by the party and the one recognized by the judge, has the same probative force as the extrajudicial confession against its author or whoever signed it or his successors in title; against strangers, has the same force as the statements of the parties that are not confessions, according to the c

1543
1543. If it is demonstrated that the documents are scratched, corrected, interpolated or affected by another defect, it is up to the judge to assess whether they can be taken into account and to what extent.

1544
1544. Documents have no probative force in the trial if their original or authentic copy is not presented, and they are deposited in the chancery of the court, so that they can be examined by the judge and the adversary.

1545
1545. The judge may order that a document common to both parties be presented in the process.

1546
1546. § 1 . No one is obliged to present documents, even common ones, that cannot be shown without danger of damage, according to the c

1547
1547. In all cases, testimonial evidence is admitted under the direction of the judge.

1548
1548. § 2, 1, 1552 and 1558-1565.
1548. § 2 , 2, or without danger of violating the obligation to maintain secrecy.
§ 2 . However, if it is possible to transcribe at least part of the document and show it without the aforementioned inconveniences, the judge may order that it be presented.
1548. § 1 . Witnesses must declare the truth to the judge who legitimately interrogates them.
§ 2 . Remaining safe from what is prescribed in c.

1549
1549. Everyone can be a witness, unless they are expressly rejected by law in whole or in part.

1550
1550. § 2, 2, are exempt from the obligation to respond:
1 the clerics, in what has been entrusted to them by reason of the sacred ministry; civil magistrates, doctors, midwives, lawyers, notaries and others who are obliged to maintain ex officio secrecy even by reason of the advice given, with regard to matters that fall under that secrecy;
2 who fear that their testimony will cause infamy, dangerous humiliation or other serious harm to themselves, to their spouse, or to blood relatives or close relatives.
1550. § 1 . Minors under fourteen years of age and the mentally weak are not admitted as witnesses, but they may be heard if the judge by decree states that it is appropriate.
§ 2 . They are considered incapable:
1 those who are parties to the case or appear at trial on behalf of the parties, the judge and his assistants, the lawyer and those others who provide or have provided assistance to the parties in the same case;
2 priests, with respect to everything they know through sacramental confession, even if the penitent asks them to manifest it; Furthermore, what someone has heard in any way for the purpose of confession cannot be accepted even as an indication of the truth.

1551
1551. The party who presented a witness may waive his examination; but the opposing party may nevertheless request that the witness be heard.

1552
1552. § 1 . When evidence is requested from witnesses, their names and addresses must be indicated to the court.
§ 2 . Within the period determined by the judge, the articles on which the interrogation of witnesses is requested must be presented; Failure to do so will result in the request being withdrawn.

1553
1553. It is up to the judge to avoid an excessive number of witnesses.

1554
1554. Before examining witnesses, their names must be notified to the parties; But if, according to the judge's prudent assessment, this cannot be done without serious difficulty, it should be done at least before the publication of the testimonies.

1555
1555. Remaining safe from what is prescribed in c. 1550, the party may request that a witness be excluded if, before his or her examination, it is proven that there is just cause for the exclusion.

1556
1556. The summons of a witness is made by decree of the judge legitimately notified to him.

1557
1557. The witness duly summoned must appear or inform the judge of the reason for his absence.

1558
1558. § 1 . Witnesses must be examined at the courthouse, unless the judge considers otherwise appropriate.
§ 2 . The Cardinals, Patriarchs, Bishops and those who according to the law of their nation enjoy that favor, must be heard in the place chosen by them.
§ 3 . The judge must decide where those who, due to distance, illness or other impediment, make it impossible or difficult to go to the court headquarters should be heard, without prejudice to what is prescribed in cc. 1418 and

1559
1559. The parties cannot attend the examination of witnesses, unless the judge, especially when private property is at issue, considers that they should be admitted. However, their lawyers or attorneys may attend, unless, due to the circumstances of the matter and the people, the judge deems that it should be proceeded in secret.

1560
1560. § 1 . Each witness must be examined separately.
§ 2 . If the witnesses disagree with each other or with the party on a serious issue, the judge can confront them, avoiding, as far as possible, dissension and scandal.

1561
1561. The judge, his delegate or an auditor examines the witness, which must be attended by a notary; Therefore, if the parties, the promoter of justice, the defender of the bond, or the lawyers who attend the interrogation, want to ask other questions to the witness, they must not ask them directly to him, but must propose them to the judge or whoever is acting in his place, so that he can ask them, unless the particular law establishes otherwise.

1562
1562. § 1 . The judge must remind the witness of his serious obligation to tell the whole truth and only the truth.
§ 2 . The judge must ask the witness to swear an oath according to c. 1532; and if the witness refuses, he must be heard without oath.

1563
1563. The judge must first verify the identity of the witness, and must ask him what his relationship is with the parties and, when he asks him specific questions about the case, he must also investigate the sources of his knowledge and at what specific moment he learned of what he states.

1564
1564. The questions must be brief, adapted to the capacity of the person being questioned, that they do not cover several issues at the same time, that they are not misleading or fallacious or that suggest an answer, that they offend no one and that they are relevant to the case.

1565
1565. § 1 . Questions should not be made known in advance to witnesses.
§ 2 . However, if the facts to be testified are so difficult to remember that they cannot be stated with certainty unless they are previously remembered, the judge may announce some points to the witness in advance, if he considers that it is possible to do so without danger.

1566
1566. Witnesses will give oral testimony and must not read writings, unless they are calculations or accounts; In this case they will be able to consult the notes they carry with them.

1567
1567. § 1 . The notary must immediately put the response in writing, recording the same words as the statement, at least as far as they directly refer to the object of the trial.
§ 2 . The use of a tape recorder may be permitted, provided that the answers are subsequently recorded in writing and signed, if possible, by those who have given evidence.

1568
1568. The notary must record in the minutes whether the oath was taken or whether it was waived or refused, and also whether the parties or other persons were present; as well as the questions added ex officio and, in general, everything that has happened during the interrogation of the witnesses and that deserves to be remembered.

1569
1569. § 1 . At the end of the examination, the notary's writing of his statement must be read to the witness, or he must hear what has been recorded on tape, giving him the opportunity to add, delete, correct or modify what he deems necessary.
§ 2 . Finally, the witness, the judge and the notary must sign the record.

1570
1570. If the judge considers it necessary or useful, as long as there is no danger of fraud or corruption, at the request of a party or ex officio, witnesses may be called again to testify before publishing the records or testimonies even if they have already been examined.

1571
1571. In accordance with the judge's fair assessment, witnesses must be reimbursed for both the expenses they have incurred and the income not received due to the testimony given.

1572
1572. When evaluating the testimonies, the judge must consider the following aspects, requesting testimonial letters, if necessary:
1 what is the condition of the person and their honesty;
2 if he declares on his own knowledge, mainly what he has seen or heard, or if he expresses his opinion, or what is common feeling or what he has heard from others;
3 whether the witness is constantly and firmly consistent with himself, or whether he is variable, uncertain or hesitant;
4 if there are competing testimonies, or if the statement is confirmed or not with other elements of evidence.

1573
1573. The statement of a single witness does not have full probative force, unless it is a qualified witness who testifies about what he has done due to his job, or unless objective or subjective circumstances persuade otherwise.

1574
1574. The help of experts must be resorted to whenever, by prescription of the law or the judge, their study and opinion is required, based on the rules of a technique or science, to verify a fact or determine the true nature of a thing.

1575
1575. It is up to the judge to appoint the experts, after hearing the parties or at their proposal; and, if appropriate, assume the opinions already prepared by other experts.

1576
1576. Experts are excluded or may be challenged for the same reasons as witnesses.

1578
1578. § 1 . Each expert must prepare his own opinion separately, unless the judge orders that only one be presented, which must be signed by all: in this case, any discrepancies, if any, must be diligently noted.
§ 2 . The experts must clearly state by what documents or other suitable means they have ascertained the identity of the people, things or places, how they have proceeded to fulfill the task entrusted to them and, above all, on what arguments they base the conclusions they have reached.
§ 3 . The expert can be called by the judge to add any explanations that seem necessary.

1579
1579. § 1 . The judge must carefully weigh not only the conclusions of the experts, even if they are consistent, but also the other circumstances of the case.
§ 2 . When you give the reasons for your decision, you must state the reasons for which you have accepted or rejected the experts' conclusions.

1580
1580. The experts will be paid the expenses and fees that the judge fairly determines, observing particular law.

1581
1581. § 1 . The parties can appoint private experts, who need the approval of the judge.
§ 2 . These, if the judge allows it, can see the minutes of the case, to the extent necessary, and attend the carrying out of the expert opinion; and they can always present their own opinion.

1582
1582. If, to decide the case, the judge considers it advisable to move to some place or examine something, he must establish this by means of a decree in which, having heard the parties, he summarily indicates the specific content of the recognition.

1583
1583. A record of the recognition carried out will be drawn up.

1584
1584. Presumption is a probable conjecture about an uncertain thing. It can be of right, when it is determined by law, or of man, if it comes from the judge's reasoning.

1585
1585. Whoever has a presumption of law in his favor is exonerated from the burden of proof, which falls on the opposing party.

1586
1586. The judge must not formulate any presumption that is not established by law, unless it is about a certain and determined fact that has a direct relationship with what is the subject of controversy.

1587
1587. An incidental cause occurs whenever, after the trial has begun by the summons, an issue is raised that, although not expressly included in the statement of claim, concerns the cause in such a way that it will normally have to be resolved before the main issue.

1588
1588. The incidental cause is proposed in writing or orally, indicating the relationship that exists between it and the main cause, before the judge who is competent to judge the latter.

1589
1589. § 1 . Once the petition has been received and the parties have been heard, the judge must decide as quickly as possible whether the proposed incidental question appears to have merit and is related to the main trial, or whether it should be rejected from the outset; and, if admitted, whether its seriousness is such that it must be resolved by interlocutory ruling or by decree.
§ 2 . If he judges that the incidental issue should not be resolved before the final ruling, he will decree that it be taken into account when the main cause is defined.

1590
1590. § 1 . If the incidental issue must be resolved by means of a ruling, the rules on the oral contentious process must be observed, unless the judge deems otherwise taking into account the seriousness of the matter.
§ 2 . But if it must be resolved by decree, the court may entrust the matter to an auditor or the president.

1591
1591. Before finishing the main case, for a just reason, the judge or the court may revoke or reform the decree or interlocutory sentence, both at the request of a party and ex officio, after hearing the parties.

1592
1592. § 1 . If the defendant does not appear when summoned or give a reasonable excuse for his absence, or respond in accordance with the c

1593
1593. § 1 . If the defendant appears later in the trial or responds before the definition of the case, he can add conclusions and evidence, remaining in place what is prescribed in c. 1600; But the judge must ensure that the trial is not intentionally prolonged with long and unnecessary delays.
§ 2 . Even if you had not appeared or responded before the definition of the case, you can challenge the sentence; and may file a complaint for annulment, if he proves that he did not appear due to a legitimate impediment, which, through no fault of his own, he was not able to prove before.
1593. § 2 .

1594
1594. If on the day and time set for the response, the plaintiff does not appear or provide an adequate excuse:
1 the judge will summon him again;
2 if the actor does not obey this new summons, it is presumed that he renounces the instance, according to ccs. 1524-1525;
3 if you later wish to intervene in the process, comply with the provisions of c. 1593.

1595
1595. § 1 . The party absent from the trial, whether the plaintiff or the defendant, who does not prove to have a just impediment, must pay the legal costs incurred by his absence and, if necessary, also compensate the other party.
§ 2 . If neither the plaintiff nor the defendant appear, they have a joint and several obligation to pay the legal costs.

1596
1596. § 1 . Whoever has an interest in the case may be admitted to intervene in any instance of the litigation, both as a party defending his or her own right and, incidentally, to help one of the litigants.
§ 2 . But, to be admitted, you must present to the judge, before the conclusion of the case, a document in which you briefly explain your right to intervene.
§ 3 . Whoever intervenes in the case must be admitted in the state in which it is located, giving him a short and peremptory period to present his evidence, if the case has already reached the evidentiary period.

1597
1597. After hearing the parties, the judge must call a third party to the trial, whose intervention he considers necessary.

1598
1598. § 1 . Once the evidence has been received, the judge, by decree, must allow, under penalty of annulment, the parties and their lawyers to examine the minutes that they do not yet know in the court's chancery; and you can even give a copy of the minutes to the lawyers who request it; However, in cases that affect the public good, the judge, to avoid very serious dangers, may decree that an act not be disclosed to anyone, taking care that the right of defense is always safeguarded.
§ 2 . To complete the evidence, the parties can propose others to the judge; and, after receiving these, if the judge considers it necessary, the decree referred to in § 1 must be issued again.

1599
1599. § 1 . Once everything related to the presentation of evidence is finished, the case is concluded.
§ 2 . This conclusion takes place when the parties declare that they have nothing more to add, or the useful period established by the judge to present the evidence has elapsed, or the judge states that the case is sufficiently investigated.
§ 3 . The judge will issue the decree concluding the case, regardless of the way in which it occurred.

1600
1600. § 1 . After the conclusion of the case, the judge may call the same or other witnesses, or order that tests not previously requested be performed, only:
1 in cases in which only the private good of the parties is involved, if all of them agree;
2 in other cases, after hearing the parties and provided there is a serious reason and any danger of fraud or bribery is avoided;
3 in all cases, when it is probable that, if new evidence is not admitted, the sentence will be unjust, for the reasons set forth in c.

1601
1601. Once the case has been concluded, the judge will establish a convenient period for the defenses or allegations to be presented.

1602
1602. § 1 . The defenses and arguments must be made in writing, unless the judge, with the consent of the parties, considers the discussion before the court in session to be sufficient.
§ 2 . The prior permission of the judge is necessary to print the defenses together with the main documents, safeguarding the obligation to maintain secrecy if such an obligation exists.
§ 3 . Regarding the extension of the defenses, number of copies and other similar circumstances, the court regulations will be observed.
1602. § 1 and 1604 § 2, a notary must attend to immediately prepare minutes of the matters discussed and the conclusions, provided that the judge orders it or consents to it at the request of the party.

1603
1603. § 1 . Once the parties have exchanged defenses and arguments, both may present replies, within a short period determined by the judge.
§ 2 . This right belongs to the parties only once, unless, for serious reasons, the judge deems that he should grant it again; and, in that case, the concession made to one party is also understood to have been granted to the other.
§ 3 . The promoter of justice and the defender of the bond have the right to reply again to the responses of the parties.

1604
1604. § 1 . It is strictly prohibited for the parties, lawyers or other persons, to transmit to the judge information that is outside the minutes of the case.
§ 2 . If the discussion of the case has been done in writing, the judge may order that a moderate oral debate be held before the court, in order to clarify some issues.

1605
1605. To the oral debate discussed in the cc

1606
1606. If the parties neglect to present the defense within the useful period, or if they refer to the science and conscience of the judge, the latter may immediately issue a sentence, if, based on what has been alleged and proven, he has full knowledge of the matter, after requesting the observations of the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond, if they intervene in the trial.

1607
1607. A case dealt with judicially, if it is main, is decided by the judge through a final sentence; if it is incidental, by means of an interlocutory sentence, without prejudice to what is established in the c

1608
1608. § 1 . To issue any sentence, moral certainty is required in the judge's mind about the matter he must resolve.
§ 2 . The judge must achieve this certainty of what is alleged and proven.
§ 3 . The judge must evaluate the evidence according to his conscience, respecting the rules on the effectiveness of certain evidence.
§ 4 . If this certainty has not been reached, the judge must rule that the actor's right is not established and must acquit the defendant, unless it is a case that enjoys the favor of the law, in which case he must rule in favor of it.

1609
1609. § 4, are also always obliged to keep secret about the discussion that takes place between the judges of the collegiate court before issuing a sentence, as well as about the different votes and opinions that have been expressed in it.
§ 3 . Furthermore, whenever, due to the nature of the case or the evidence, the reputation of others may be jeopardized by the disclosure of the records or evidence, or quarrels may arise or a scandal or other similar inconvenience may be caused, the judge may require witnesses and experts, as well as the parties and their lawyers or attorneys, to maintain secrecy under oath.
1609. § 1 . When the court is collegial, the president will establish the day and time in which the judges must meet to deliberate; and, unless a special cause advises otherwise, the meeting will be held at the same headquarters of the court.
§ 2 . On the appointed day, each judge will present his written conclusions on the subject of the litigation, with the reasons on which they are based, both in law and in fact; and these conclusions, which must be kept secret, will be added to the minutes of the case.
§ 3 . After invoking the Name of God, reading the conclusions of each one in order of precedence, but always starting with the rapporteur or rapporteur of the case, there is a discussion, under the direction of the president of the court, especially to determine what should be established in the operative part of the sentence.
§ 4 . In the discussion any judge can modify his previous conclusion. But the judge who does not want to join the decision of the others can demand that, if there is an appeal, his conclusions be transmitted to the higher court.
§ 5 . If the judges are unwilling or unable to issue a ruling in the first discussion, the decision may be deferred until a new meeting, but not for more than one week, unless the investigation of the case is to be completed in accordance with c. 1600.

1610
1610. § 1 . If the judge is the only one, he will write the sentence himself.
§ 2 . In the collegiate court, it is up to the rapporteur or rapporteur to write the sentence, taking the reasons from among those that the judges presented in the discussion unless the majority of the judges expressly determines the reasons that are to be preferred; The sentence must then be submitted to the approval of each of them.
§ 3 . The sentence must be given within one month from the day on which the case was defined, unless, for a serious reason, the judges of a collegiate court establish a longer period.

1611
1611. The sentence must:
1 settle the controversy discussed before the court, giving each doubt the appropriate answer;
2 determine what the obligations of the parties derived from the trial are, and how they are to be fulfilled;
3 present the reasons or motives, both legal and factual, on which the operative part of the sentence is based;
4 determine what refers to the costs of the litigation.

1612
1612. § 1 . After invoking the Name of God, the sentence must state, in order, who is the judge or the court; who are the plaintiff, the defendant and the attorney, indicating their names and addresses; as well as the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond, if they took part in the trial.
§ 2 . Afterwards, you must briefly explain the fact in question, the conclusions of the parties and the formula of the doubts.
§ 3 . The operative part of the sentence will follow, preceded by the reasons on which it is based.
§ 4 . It concludes with the indication of the day and place in which it was issued, with the signature of the judge or of all the judges, if the court is collegial, and of the notary.
1612. § 4, the sentence must be corrected or completed at the request of a party, or ex officio, by the same court that issued it, but always after hearing the parties and adding a decree at the bottom of the sentence.
§ 2 . If either party objects, the incidental issue will be decided by decree.

1613
1613. The rules set out above regarding the final sentence must also be adapted to the interlocutory sentence.

1614
1614. The ruling must be published as soon as possible, indicating how it can be challenged; and does not produce any effect before its publication, even when the operative part has been notified to the parties, with the permission of the judge.

1615
1615. The publication or notification of the judgment can be done either by delivering a copy of it to the parties or their attorneys, or by sending it in accordance with c. 1509.

1616
1616. § 1 . If in the text of the ruling there was a calculation error, or a material error had slipped in the transcription of the operative part or in the presentation of the facts or the requests of the parties, or the requirements of the c

1617
1617. Outside of the sentence, the other pronouncements of the judge are decrees, which, unless they are mere formalities, lack any effectiveness if they do not state, at least in a summary manner, the reasons, or do not refer to reasons already expressed in another act.

1618
1618. The interlocutory sentence or the decree has the force of a final sentence if it prevents or puts an end to the trial or an instance thereof, at least as regards one of the parties in the case.

1619
1619. Whenever it is a case that refers to the good of private persons, the nullities of the acts established by positive law that, being known by the party proposing the complaint, have not been reported to the judge before the sentence are healed by the sentence, remaining in place what is prescribed by the cc.

1620
1620. The sentence suffers from an irremediable defect of nullity if:
1 was ruled by a completely incompetent judge;
2 was issued by someone who lacks the power to judge in the court before which the case has been tried;
3 the judge issued the sentence under duress due to violence or serious fear;
4 the trial has been carried out without the judicial request referred to in c. 1501, or was not filed against any defendant;
5 occurred between parties of which at least one does not have the capacity to act in court;
6 someone acted on behalf of another without a legitimate mandate;
7 one of the two parties was denied the right of defense;
8 did not settle the controversy, not even partially.
1620. can be proposed perpetually as an exception and as an action, within a period of ten years from the date of the sentence, before the judge who issued it.

1621
1621. The annulment complaint referred to in the c

1622
1622. and 1623.
1622. The sentence suffers from a defect of curable nullity, exclusively if:
1 has been given by a non-legitimate number of judges, contrary to what is prescribed in c.

1623
1623. In the cases referred to in c. 1622, the annulment complaint can be filed within a period of three months from when the publication of the ruling became known.

1624
1624. The annulment complaint is examined by the same judge who issued the sentence; but if the party fears that said judge is prejudiced and, therefore, considers him suspicious, he may demand that he be replaced by another judge, in accordance with c. 1450.

1625
1625. The annulment complaint may be proposed together with the appeal, within the period established for it.

1626
1626. § 1 . Not only the parties who consider themselves harmed, but also the promoter of justice or the defender of the bond can file an annulment complaint, when they have the right to intervene.
§ 2 . The same judge may revoke or amend ex officio the null sentence he issued, within the period determined in c. 1623, unless, in the meantime, an appeal has been filed together with the complaint for nullity, or the nullity has been corrected due to expiration of the period indicated in c. 1623.

1627
1627. Cases involving a nullity complaint can be dealt with according to the rules of the oral contentious process.

1628
1628. The party that considers itself harmed by a sentence, as well as the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond in cases that require their presence, have the right to appeal to the superior judge against the sentence, subject to what is prescribed in c. 1629.

1629
1629. There is no appeal:
1 against the sentence of the Supreme Pontiff himself or of the Apostolic Signature;
2 against the sentence that suffers from a defect of nullity, unless the appeal is joined with the complaint for nullity, in accordance with c. 1625;
3 against the sentence that has become res judicata;
4 against the judge's decree or interlocutory sentence that does not have the force of a final sentence, unless it is combined with the appeal against the final sentence;
5 against the sentence or decree in a case that according to the law must be resolved as quickly as possible.

1630
1630. § 1 . The appeal must be filed before the judge who handed down the sentence, within the peremptory period of fifteen business days from when the publication of the sentence became known.
§ 2 . If it is filed orally, the notary will draft it in writing in the presence of the appellant.

1631
1631. If a question arises regarding the right to appeal, it must be resolved as quickly as possible by the court of appeal, according to the rules on the oral contentious process.

1632
1632. § 1 . If the appeal does not indicate which court it is addressed to, it is presumed to have been made to the court that the ccs deal with.

1633
1633. The appeal must be continued before the judge ad quem within a period of one month from when it was filed, unless the judge a quo had granted the party a longer period to pursue it.

1634
1634. § 1 . To continue the appeal, it is required and sufficient for the party to invoke the intervention of the superior judge to correct the contested sentence, attaching a copy of it and indicating the reasons why it is appealing.
§ 2 . But if the party cannot obtain from the court a quo a copy of the contested ruling in a timely manner, the deadlines do not run in the meantime, and said impediment must be notified to the judge of appeal who must order the judge a quo to fulfill his obligation as soon as possible.
§ 3 . Meanwhile, the judge a quo must send the minutes to the judge of appeal, in accordance with c. 1474.

1635
1635. Once the deadlines for appeal before the judges a quo or ad quem have elapsed in vain, the appeal is considered void.

1636
1636. § 1 . The person who has appealed may waive the appeal, with the effects specified in c. 1525.
§ 2 . If the appeal has been filed by the defender of the bond or by the promoter of justice, the waiver may proceed, if the law does not establish otherwise, by the defender of the bond or the promoter of justice of the court of appeal.

1637
1637. § 1 . The plaintiff's appeal also benefits the defendant, and vice versa.
§ 2 . If there are several defendants or actors and only one or against one of them challenges the ruling, it is considered that the challenge has been filed by all and against all, provided that the thing requested is indivisible or is a joint obligation.
§ 3 . If a party appeals on any chapter of the sentence, the opposing party, even if the deadline for appealing has elapsed, may do so incidentally on other chapters of the sentence, within the peremptory period of fifteen days from when the main appeal was notified.
§ 4 . Unless otherwise stated, the appeal is presumed to have been made against all chapters of the sentence.

1638
1638. The appeal suspends the execution of the sentence.

1639
1639. § 1 . Except as provided by c. 1683, at the level of appeal a new cause of action cannot be admitted, not even as a useful accumulation; Therefore, the response can only address whether the previous ruling is confirmed or reformed in whole or in part.
§ 2 . New evidence is only admitted in accordance with c. 1600.

1640
1640. At the level of appeal, the procedure must be followed, with due adaptations, in the same way as in the first instance, but, unless the evidence must be completed, immediately after the response, made in accordance with the cc

1641
1641. Remaining safe from what is prescribed in c. 1643, res judicata occurs:
1 if there are two conforming rulings between the same litigants, on the same request made for the same reasons;
2 if an appeal against the sentence had not been filed within the useful period;
3 if, at the level of appeal, the instance had expired or had been waived;
4 if a final sentence was handed down, against which there is no appeal, in accordance with c. 1629.

1642
1642. § 1 . Res judicata enjoys the finality of the law, and cannot be challenged directly, if it is not in accordance with the c

1643
1643. Cases regarding the status of persons, including separation of spouses, never become res judicata.

1644
1644. § 1 . If two consistent sentences are pronounced in a case regarding the status of persons, an appeal may be made at any time to the court of appeal, alleging new and serious evidence or reasons, within the peremptory period of thirty days from when the challenge was proposed. And, within one month from the presentation of the new evidence and reasons, the appeal court must decide by decree whether or not to admit the new proposition of the case.
§ 2 . The petition to the superior court to obtain a new proposal of the case does not suspend the execution of the sentence, unless the law establishes otherwise or the court of appeal orders that it be suspended in accordance with c.

1645
1645. § 2, 1 -3.
§ 2 . The judge can, however, order or allow a document to be presented, which perhaps could not be presented before through no fault of the interested party.
§ 3 . The new tests must be published, complying with c.
1645. § 1 .
§ 2 . It makes law between the parties and gives rise to action and with the exception of res judicata, which the judge can also declare ex officio to prevent the same case from being reintroduced.
1645. § 1 . Restitution in integrum is possible against a sentence that has become res judicata, as long as its injustice is clearly established.
§ 2 . Only injustice is considered manifest:
1 if the sentence is so based on evidence, which has subsequently been discovered to be false, that without such evidence the operative part of the sentence becomes unsustainable;
2 if documents are subsequently discovered that unequivocally prove new facts that require a contrary decision;
3 if the sentence has been caused by fraud on the part of one party and damage to the other;
4 if it is evident that the prescription of a law that is not merely procedural has been disregarded;
5 if the sentence contradicts a preceding decision that has become res judicata.
1645. § 2 , 1-3, the judge who handed down the sentence must be requested within a period of three months, starting from the day on which those reasons became known.
§ 2 . Restitution in integrum for the reasons indicated in c.
1645. § 2 , 4 and 5, the appeal court must be requested within three months from when the publication of the ruling became known; but in the case of c. 1645
§ 2, 5, if the preceding decision became known later, the period begins to run from then on.
§ 3 . The deadlines established above do not begin to be computed while the injured party is a minor.

1646
1646. § 1 . Restitution in integrum for the reasons indicated in the c

1647
1647. § 1 . The request for restitution in integrum suspends the execution of the sentence if it has not yet begun to be carried out.
§ 2 . However, when due to probable indications it is suspected that the request has been made to delay execution, the judge may order that the sentence be executed, giving the appropriate guarantees to the petitioner in the event that restitution in integrum is granted.

1648
1648. Once restitution in integrum has been granted, the judge must rule on the substance of the case.

1649
1649. § 1 . The Bishop, who is responsible for moderating the tribunal, must dictate norms regarding:
1 the order of the parties to pay or compensate legal costs;
2 the fees of attorneys, lawyers, experts and interpreters, as well as compensation for witnesses;
3 the granting of free sponsorship or reduced costs;
4 the compensation for damages owed by the person who not only lost the lawsuit, but also litigated recklessly;
5 the deposit of money or guarantee that must be provided for the payment of costs and compensation for damages.
§ 2 . There is no separate appeal against the ruling on costs, fees and compensation for damages, but the party may appeal within fifteen days, before the same judge, who may modify the assessment.

1650
1650. § 3 .
1650. § 1 . A sentence that has become res judicata may be executed, except as prescribed in c. 1647.
§ 2 . The judge who handed down the sentence, and also the appeal judge, where appropriate, may order ex officio or at the request of a party the provisional execution of a sentence that has not yet become res judicata, when it concerns provisions or benefits ordered for necessary support, or when another just cause is urgent, establishing the appropriate guarantees, if necessary.
§ 3 . When the ruling in question is challenged in the § 2, if the judge who must decide on the challenge sees that it has a probable basis and that irreparable damage may result from the execution, he may suspend the execution or make it subject to the provision of a guarantee.

1651
1651. Execution cannot proceed before obtaining the executive decree of the judge, by which he orders that the sentence be executed; and, depending on the nature of the case, this decree may be included in the same sentence or given separately.

1652
1652. If the execution of the sentence requires prior rendering of accounts, an incidental question arises, which must be decided by the same judge who issued the sentence whose execution is in question.

1653
1653. § 1 . Unless the particular law establishes otherwise, the Bishop of the diocese in which the first degree sentence was issued must order it to be executed, personally or through another.
§ 2 . If this refuses or is negligent, the execution, at the request of the interested party or also ex officio, corresponds to the authority to which, according to c.

1654
1654. § 1 . The executor must execute the sentence according to the obvious meaning of his words, unless something was left to his discretion in the sentence itself.
§ 2 . The executor can decide on exceptions regarding the manner and effectiveness of the execution, but not about the substance of the cause; but if you know on the other hand that the sentence is null or manifestly unjust, in accordance with cc. 1620, 1622, 1645, must refrain from executing it and refer the matter to the court that issued the sentence, notifying the parties.

1655
1655. § 1 . As regards real actions, when something has been awarded to the actor, it will be delivered to him as soon as res judicata occurs.
§ 2 . But with regard to personal actions, when the defendant has been sentenced to deliver a movable thing, or to pay an amount of money, or to give or do something else, the judge in the same sentence or the executor, according to his discretion and prudence, will determine a period of time to fulfill the obligation, not less than fifteen days nor more than six months.

1656
1656. § 1 . Through the oral litigation process regulated in this section, all causes not excluded by law can be dealt with, unless one of the parties requests that the ordinary litigation process be followed.
§ 2 . Judicial acts are void if the oral process is used outside the cases permitted by law.

1657
1657. The oral contentious process is carried out in the first degree before a single judge, in accordance with c. 1424.

1658
1658. § 1 . In addition to what is indicated in c. 1504, the statement of claim must:
1 state briefly, completely and clearly the facts on which the actor's requests are based;
2 indicate the evidence by which the actor intends to demonstrate the facts and that he cannot provide with the claim, so that the judge can collect them immediately.
§ 2 . The documents on which the request is based must be added to the application, at least in an authentic copy.

1659
1659. § 1 . When the attempt at conciliation in accordance with the c
1659. and 1660, and in view of the minutes, the judge will determine the formula of the doubt; and then summon all those who must attend the hearing, which must be held within a period of no more than thirty days, communicating to the parties the formula of the doubt.
§ 2 . In the summons, advise the parties that, at least three days before the hearing, they may submit to the court a brief brief to demonstrate their claims.

1660
1660. If the exceptions proposed by the defendant require it, the judge will set a deadline for the actor to respond, so that, in view of the allegations of both parties, he can take charge of the object of the controversy.

1661
1661. § 1 . After the deadlines indicated in the cc

1662
1662. At the hearing, the issues referred to in ccs must be addressed first. 1459-1464.

1663
1663. § 1 . The evidence is collected at the hearing, except as determined in c. 1418.
§ 2 . Each party and its lawyer may attend the examination of the others and of witnesses and experts.

1664
1664. The notary must collect in writing the responses of the parties, the witnesses and the experts, as well as the requests and exceptions of the lawyers, but in a summarized manner and only as pertinent to the substance of the litigation; and these writings must be signed by the declarants.

1665
1665. Evidence that has not been presented or requested in the petition or response can only be admitted by the judge in accordance with c. 1452; but after even a single witness has been heard, the judge can only order other evidence in accordance with c. 1600.

1666
1666. If it is not possible to collect all the evidence in a hearing, another hearing will be called.

1667
1667. Once the evidence is gathered, the oral discussion will proceed in the same hearing.

1668
1668. § 1 . If the discussion does not reveal the need for a supplementary instruction or the existence of another impediment to handing down a sentence, the judge must decide the case immediately, at the end of the hearing and alone; and the operative part of the sentence must be read immediately before the parties present.
§ 2 . Due to the difficulty of the matter or other just cause, the court may defer the sentence for five business days.
§ 3 . The full text of the ruling must be notified to the parties as soon as possible, stating the reasons, ordinarily within a period of no more than fifteen days.

1669
1669. If the court of appeal observes that at the lower level the oral contentious process has been used in a case excluded by law, it must declare the sentence null and void and return the case to the court that issued that sentence.

1670
1670. In other matters relating to the procedure, the rules on the ordinary contentious trial must be observed. However, the court may, by reasoned decree, and without detriment to justice, repeal procedural rules whose compliance is not required for validity, in order to achieve greater speed.

1671
1671. § 1 . The matrimonial causes of the baptized correspond to the ecclesiastical judge in his own right.
§ 2 . Causes regarding the merely civil effects of marriage belong to the civil judge, unless particular law establishes that such causes can be treated and decided by the ecclesiastical judge when they are raised in an incidental and accessory manner.
1671. The matrimonial causes of the baptized correspond to the ecclesiastical judge in his own right.

1672
1672. For causes of annulment of marriage not reserved to the Apostolic See, the following are competent: 1° the court of the place where the marriage was celebrated; 2° the court of the place in which one or both parties have their domicile or quasi-domicile; 3° the court of the place where the majority of the evidence is to be collected.
1672. Causes regarding the merely civil effects of marriage belong to the civil judge, unless particular law establishes that such causes can be treated and decided by the ecclesiastical judge when they are raised in an incidental and accessory manner.

1673
1673. § 1 . In each diocese the judge of first instance for causes of marriage annulment, for which the law does not expressly make an exception, is the diocesan Bishop, who can exercise judicial power himself or through others, in accordance with the law.
§ 2 . The Bishop constitutes for his diocese the diocesan court for causes of marriage annulment, leaving aside the right for the same Bishop to access another nearby court, diocesan or interdiocesan.
§ 3 . Causes of marriage annulment are reserved to a panel of three judges. This must be presided over by a clerical judge, the other judges can also be laymen.
§ 4 . The Moderating Bishop, if it is not possible to establish the collegiate court in the diocese or in the nearby court that has been chosen in accordance with § 2, entrusts the cases to a single judge, a clergyman, who, where possible, associates two advisors of exemplary life, experts in legal or human sciences, approved by the Bishop for this task; The same single judge is responsible, unless it is otherwise, of the functions attributed to the college, the president or the rapporteur.
§ 5 . The court of second instance, for validity, must always be collegial, as provided in the § 3.
§ 6 . From the court of first instance an appeal is made to the metropolitan court of second instance, except as provided in canons 1438-1439 and 1444.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
Art. 1 — COMPETENT COURT
1673. For causes of marriage annulment not reserved for the Apostolic See, the following are competent:
1 the court of the place where the marriage took place;
2 the court of the place where the defendant has his domicile or quasi-domicile;
3 the court of the place where the plaintiff has his domicile, provided that both parties reside in the territory of the same Episcopal Conference and the judicial Vicar of the domicile of the defendant gives his consent, having heard the latter;
4 the court of the place where the majority of the evidence is actually to be collected, provided that it is consented to by the Judicial Vicar of the domicile of the defendant, after consulting the defendant in case he has any objection.
1673. § 4 .
§ 4 . If, however, the shorter process is ordered, the Judicial Vicar will proceed in accordance with Can. 1685.
§ 5 . The formula of doubt must determine by which chapter or chapters the validity of the nuptials is challenged.

1674
1674. § 1 . nThey are able to challenge the marriage:
1° the spouses; 2° the promoter of justice, when the annulment has already been disclosed if it is not possible or convenient to validate the marriage.
§ 2 . A marriage that was not accused during the lifetime of both spouses cannot be challenged after the death of one or both of them, unless the question of its validity is prejudicial to resolving another controversy, either in the canonical jurisdiction or in the civil jurisdiction.
§ 3 . If the spouse dies while the case is pending, the provisions of the Can. 1518 must be observed.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
1674. The following are competent to challenge the marriage:
2 the promoter of justice, when the annulment has already been disclosed if it is not possible or convenient to validate the marriage.

1675
1675. § 1 . A marriage that was not accused during the lifetime of both spouses cannot be challenged after the death of one or both of them, unless the question of its validity is prejudicial to resolving another controversy, either in the canonical jurisdiction or in the civil jurisdiction.
§ 2 . If the spouse dies while the case is pending, the provisions of c. 1518
1675. The judge, before accepting a case, must be certain that the marriage has irreparably failed, so that it is impossible to reestablish conjugal coexistence.

1676
1676. § 1 . Once the claim is received, the Judicial Vicar, if he considers that it has some basis, admits it and, with a decree attached to the foot of the claim, orders that a copy be notified to the defender of the bond and, if the claim has not been signed by both parties, to the defendant, giving him a period of fifteen days to express his position regarding the claim.
§ 2 . Once the predicted period has elapsed, after having reprimanded the other party, if he sees it appropriate and to the extent he deems it appropriate, so that he can express his position, after hearing the defender of the bond, the judicial Vicar with his decree determines the formula of doubts and establishes whether the cause should be treated with the shortest process in accordance with canons 1683-1687. This decree must be notified immediately to the parties and the defender of the bond.
§ 3 . If the case must be treated with the ordinary process, the Judicial Vicar, with the same decree, provides for the constitution of the college of judges or the sole judge with the two advisors according to Can. 1676. Before accepting a case and whenever he sees some hope of success, the judge will use pastoral means to induce the spouses, if possible, to validate their marriage and reestablish conjugal coexistence.

1677
1677. § 1 . The defender of the bond, the lawyers and also the promoter of justice, if he intervenes in the trial, have the right: 1° to attend the examination of the parties, the witnesses and the experts, subject to what is prescribed by the Can. 1559; 2° to know the judicial records, even when they are not published, and to examine the documents presented by the parties.
§ 2 . The parties cannot attend the exam discussed in § 1, n. 1.
1677. § 1 . Once the demand is accepted, the president or the rapporteur will proceed to notify the summons decree, in accordance with c. 1508.
§ 2 . Fifteen days after notification, the president or rapporteur, unless one of the parties has requested a session to answer the claim, within ten days will determine by decree and ex officio the formula of the doubt or doubts, and will notify the parties.
§ 3 . The doubt formula must not only raise whether the nullity of the marriage is established in the case in question, but also specify by which chapter or chapters its validity is challenged.
§ 4 . After ten days from the notification of the decree, if the parties have not objected anything, the president or the rapporteur will order the investigation of the case with a new decree.

1678
1678. § 1 . In cases of annulment of marriage, the judicial confession and the statements of the parties, supported by possible witnesses regarding their credibility, may have the value of full evidence, which the judge must evaluate considering all the evidence and devices, if there are no other elements that refute them.
§ 2 . In the same cases, the deposition of a single witness may have full probative force, if it is a qualified witness who testifies about what he has done based on his job, or if the objective or subjective circumstances so suggest.
§ 3 . In cases involving impotence or lack of consent due to mental illness or an anomaly of a psychic nature, the judge will use one or more experts, unless, due to the circumstances, there is evidence that this expertise will be useless; In other cases, what is indicated in Can. 1574 must be observed.
§ 4 . When a very probable doubt arises in the investigation of the case that the consummation of the marriage has not occurred, the court may, after hearing the parties, suspend the cause of annulment, carry out the investigation of the process for the dispensation of the marriage for a while, and then transmit the minutes to the Apostolic See together with the request for dispensation made by both spouses or by one of them, and with the vote of the court and the Bishop.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
Art. 3 — OF THE OFFICE OF JUDGES
1678. § 1 . The defender of the bond, the lawyers and also the promoter of justice if he intervenes in the trial, have the right:
1 to attend the examination of the parties, witnesses and experts, keeping in mind what is prescribed in c. 1559.
2 to know the judicial records, even when they are not published, and to examine the documents presented by the parties.
§ 2 . The parties cannot attend the exam discussed in § 1, 1.

1679
1679. The sentence that for the first time declared the nullity of the marriage, once the terms established in canons 1630-1633 have been fulfilled, becomes executive.
1679. Unless the evidence is otherwise complete, to evaluate the statements of the parties in accordance with c. 1536, the judge must require, if possible, witnesses to testify about the credibility of the parties; and will also use other clues and gadgets.

1680
1680. § 1 . The right of the party who considers himself harmed, as well as the promoter of justice and the defender of the bond, to file a complaint for annulment or appeal against the same sentence, remains intact, according to canons 1619-1640.
§ 2 . Once the terms established by law for the appeal and its prosecution have elapsed, after the court of the higher instance has received the judicial records, the college of judges is constituted, the defender of the bond is appointed and the parties are warned to present observations within an established period; After that period, the collegiate court, if it is evident that the appeal is merely dilatory, confirms the first instance ruling with a decree.
§ 3 . If the appeal has been admitted, the same procedure must be followed as in the first instance, with the appropriate adaptations.
§ 4 . If in the level of appeal a new chapter is adduced requesting the declaration of nullity of a marriage, the court of appeal may admit it and judge about it as in the first instance.
1680. In cases involving impotence or lack of consent due to mental illness, the judge will use one or more experts, unless, due to the circumstances, there is evidence that this expertise will be useless; In other cases, what c. indicates must be observed. 1574.

1681
1681. If an executive sentence has been pronounced, an appeal may be made at any time to the third degree court for the new proposal of the case in accordance with the Can. 1644, alleging new and serious evidence and reasons, within the peremptory period of thirty days from the challenge.
1681. When during the investigation of the case a very probable doubt arises that the consummation of the marriage has not occurred, the court may, suspending the cause of annulment with the consent of the parties, carry out the investigation of the process for the dispensation of the marriage for a while, and then transmit the minutes to the Apostolic See together with the request for dispensation made by both spouses or by one of them, and with the vote of the court and the Bishop.

1682
1682. § 1 . After the sentence declaring the nullity of the marriage has become enforceable, the parties whose marriage has been declared null may contract new marriages, unless this is prohibited by a veto included in the same sentence, or established by the local Ordinary.
1682. § 1 . The ruling declaring for the first time the annulment of a marriage, together with the appeals, if any, and other minutes of the process, must be transmitted ex officio to the court of appeal within a period of twenty days from the publication of the ruling.
§ 2 . If the ruling in favor of annulment has been issued in the first instance, the court of appeal, considering the observations of the defender of the bond and, if any, also those of the parties, must, by decree, either confirm the decision without delay or admit the case so that it can be examined with ordinary procedures in the new instance.
1682. § 2 .

1683
1683. The same Bishop is responsible for judging the causes of nullity whenever:
1° the request has been proposed by both spouses or by one of them, with the consent of the other;
2° there are circumstances of the people and the facts, supported by testimonies or documents, that do not require an investigation or a more precise instruction, and make the nullity evident.
1683. If in the level of appeal a new chapter is adduced requesting the declaration of nullity of a marriage, the court of appeal may admit it and judge about it as in the first instance.

1684
1684. The document of claim with which the briefest process is introduced, in addition to the elements listed in the Can. 1504, must: 1° briefly state, in a comprehensive and clear manner, the facts on which the petition is based; 2° indicate the evidence that can be immediately collected by the judge; 3° display as attachments the documents on which the request is based.
1684. § 1 . When the sentence that first declared the nullity of a marriage has been confirmed at the level of appeal by decree or new sentence, those whose marriage has been declared null may contract new marriages from the moment in which they have been notified of the decree or new sentence, unless this is prohibited by a veto included in the sentence or decree, or established by the local Ordinary.
§ 2 . The prescriptions of c. 1644 must be observed even if the sentence declaring the nullity of the marriage had been confirmed not with another sentence, but by decree.

1685
1685. The judicial Vicar, with the same decree with which he determines the formula of doubts, appoints the instructor and the advisor, and summons to the session, which must be held in accordance with Can. 1686, no more than thirty days, all those who must participate.
1685. As soon as the sentence has been made enforceable, the judicial Vicar must notify it to the Ordinary of the place where the marriage was celebrated. And he must ensure that the nullity that has been declared and the prohibitions that may have been added are noted as soon as possible in the marriage book and in the baptism book.

1686
1686. The instructor, to the extent possible, collects the evidence in a single session, and sets a period of fifteen days for the presentation of observations in favor of the bond and the defenses of the parties, if any.
1686. Once the request made in accordance with c. 1677, the judicial Vicar or the judge designated by him may declare by sentence the annulment of a marriage, omitting the solemnities of the ordinary process but summoning the parties and with the intervention of the defender of the bond, if a document to which no objection or exception can be opposed establishes with certainty the existence of a decisive impediment or the defect of legitimate form, as long as it is stated with equal certainty that no dispensation was granted, or that the attorney lacks a valid mandate.
1686. or the lack of dispensation are not true, you must appeal against this declaration to the judge of second instance, to whom the records must be sent, warning him in writing that this is a documentary process.
§ 2 . The party that considers itself aggrieved retains the right to appeal intact.
1686. whether the sentence should be confirmed or rather whether the case should proceed according to the ordinary legal procedure; and, in this case, it will be referred to the court of first instance.

1687
1687. § 1 . Having received the minutes, the diocesan Bishop, consulting the instructor and the advisor, examining the observations of the defender of the bond and, if they exist, the defenses of the parties, if he reaches moral certainty about the nullity of the marriage, gives the sentence. Otherwise, refer the case to the ordinary process.
§ 2 . The full text of the ruling, with the reasons, must be notified to the parties as soon as possible.
§ 3 . Against the Bishop's sentence an appeal is made to the Metropolitan or to the Roman Rota; If the sentence was given by the Metropolitan, an appeal is made to the oldest suffragan; and against the sentence of another Bishop who has no other superior authority below the Roman Pontiff, an appeal is made to the Bishop stably appointed by him.
§ 4 . If it becomes evident that the appeal is merely dilatory, the Metropolitan or the Bishop mentioned in the § 3, or the Dean of the Roman Rota, will reject it by decree from the first moment; If, however, the appeal is admitted, the case is sent to the ordinary examination in the second degree.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
Art. 5 — JUDGMENT AND APPEAL
1687. § 1 . If the defender of the bond prudently considers that the defects indicated in the c

1688
1688. Once the request made in accordance with the Can. 1676 has been received, the diocesan Bishop, or the judicial Vicar or the designated judge, may declare by means of a ruling the annulment of a marriage, omitting the solemnities of the ordinary process, but summoning the parties and with the intervention of the defender of the bond, if a document to which no objection or exception can be opposed establishes with certainty the existence of a disposing impediment or the defect in legitimate form, provided that It is stated with equal certainty that no dispensation was granted, or that the attorney lacks a valid mandate.
1688. or the lack of dispensation are not true, you must appeal against this declaration to the judge of second instance, to whom the records must be sent, warning him in writing that this is a documentary process.
§ 2 . The party that considers itself aggrieved retains the right to appeal intact.
1688. whether the sentence should be confirmed or rather the case should proceed according to the ordinary legal procedure; and, in that case, it will be referred to the court of first instance.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
Art. 6 — THE DOCUMENTARY PROCESS
1688. The judge of second instance, with the intervention of the defender of the bond and having heard the parties, will decide in the manner indicated in the c

1689
1689. § 1 . If the defender of the bond prudently considers that the defects indicated in the can
1689. In the sentence, the parties must be warned about the moral or even civil obligations that may weigh on them with respect to the other party and their children, with regard to sustenance and education.

1690
1690. The judge of second instance, with the intervention of the defender of the bond and having heard the parties, will decide in the manner indicated in Can. 1690. Causes for declaration of marriage nullity cannot be processed through the oral contentious process.

1691
1691. § 1 . In the sentence, the parties must be warned about the moral or even civil obligations that they may have with respect to the other party and their children, with regard to sustenance and education.
§ 2 . The causes of declaration of nullity of marriage cannot be processed through the oral contentious process referred to in canons 1656-1670.
§ 3 . In other things that refer to the procedure, if the nature of the matter does not prevent it, the canons on trials in general and on the ordinary contentious trial must be applied, complying with the special rules for causes about the state of people and for those that refer to the public good.
(n Indicates that the text corresponds to the new version)
[Original wording of the canons modified by His Holiness Pope Francis (cf. Apostolic Letter in the form of Motu Proprio Mitis Iudex Dominus Iesus, dated August 15, 2015)]:
Art. 7 — GENERAL RULES
1691. In other things that refer to the procedure, if the nature of the matter does not prevent it, the canons on trials in general and on the ordinary contentious trial must be applied, complying with the special rules for causes about the state of people and for those that refer to the public good.

1692
1692. § 1 . Unless otherwise legitimately provided for in a given place, the personal separation of baptized spouses can be decided by decree of the diocesan Bishop, or by ruling of the judge, in accordance with the canons that follow.
§ 2 . Where the ecclesiastical decision does not produce civil effects, or if it is anticipated that the civil sentence will not be contrary to divine right, the Bishop of the diocese of residence of the spouses, taking into account peculiar circumstances, may grant permission to resort to civil jurisdiction.
§ 3 . If the case also concerns the purely civil effects of the marriage, the judge ensures that, in compliance with the provisions of the § 2, the case is brought to the civil jurisdiction from the first moment.

1693
1693. § 1 . If one of the parties or the promoter of justice does not request the ordinary contentious process, the oral contentious process will be followed.
§ 2 . If the ordinary contentious process has been followed and there is an appeal, the court of second instance will proceed, with due proportions, in accordance with c.

1694
1694. Regarding the jurisdiction of the court, the provisions of c. 1673.

1695
1695. Before accepting a case and whenever there is hope of success, the judge must employ pastoral means so that the spouses are reconciled and induced to reestablish the conjugal community.

1696
1696. The causes of separation of spouses also affect the public good and, therefore, the promoter of justice must always intervene in them, in accordance with c. 1433.

1697
1697. Only the spouses, or one of them even if the other objects, have the right to request the grace of dispensation from temporary and unconsummated marriage.

1698
1698. § 1 . Only the Apostolic See judges the fact of the inconsummation of the marriage and the existence of just cause to grant the dispensation.
§ 2 . The dispensation is granted only by the Roman Pontiff.

1699
1699. § 1 . To receive the document requesting the dispensation, the diocesan Bishop of the domicile or quasi-domicile of the speaker is competent, who, if it is established that the request is founded, must order the instruction of the process.
§ 2 . But if the proposed case raises special legal or moral difficulties, the diocesan Bishop must consult the Apostolic See.
§ 3 . Against the decree by which the Bishop rejects the request, there is an appeal to the Apostolic See.

1700
1700. § 1 . Remaining in force what is mandated by c. 1681, the Bishop will entrust the investigation of these processes, stably or in each case, to the tribunal of his diocese or another diocese, or to a suitable priest.
§ 2 . But if a judicial claim was made for the declaration of nullity of that marriage, the instruction must be entrusted to the same court.

1701
1701. § 1 . The defender of the bond must always intervene in these processes.
§ 2 . A lawyer is not admitted, but, due to the difficulty of the case, the Bishop may allow the speaker or the defendant to use the collaboration of a legal expert.
1701. § 2 , may examine the minutes of the proceedings at the seat of the court, but not the vote of the Bishop, and consider whether any serious reason can be adduced that would allow the petition to be presented again.

1702
1702. During the investigation, both spouses must be heard, and to the extent possible, the canons on how to collect evidence in the ordinary contentious trial and in cases of annulment of marriage must be observed, provided that they can be reconciled with the nature of these processes.

1703
1703. § 1 . Minutes are not published; However, if the judge considers that a serious obstacle to the speaker's request or to the defendant's objection may arise from the evidence presented, he or she will prudently inform the interested party.
§ 2 . The judge may show the party that requests it a document presented or a testimony received and set a deadline for presenting conclusions.

1704
1704. § 1 . Once the instruction is concluded, the instructor will transmit all the minutes with the appropriate report to the Bishop, and he will express his vote regarding the truth both about the fact of the inconsummation and about the just cause for the dispensation and the opportunity for that grace to be granted.
§ 2 . Yes, according to c. 1700, the investigation of the process was entrusted to a foreign court, the observations in favor of the link must be made in that same court, but the vote referred to in § 1 corresponds to the Bishop who carried out the commission, to whom the instructor will deliver the appropriate report, along with the minutes.

1705
1705. § 1 . The Bishop will send all the minutes to the Apostolic See, along with his vote and the observations of the defender of the bond.
§ 2 . If, in the opinion of the Apostolic See, additional instruction is required, the Bishop will be informed, indicating the aspects on which it should address.
§ 3 . If in the rescript of the Apostolic See it is declared that, from what has been deduced, there is no evidence of inconsummation, the legal expert referred to in c.

1706
1706. The Apostolic See sends the rescript of dispensation to the Bishop; and he will notify the parties, and will also order as soon as possible the parish priests of the place where the marriage was celebrated and where they received the baptism to note in the books of marriages and baptized persons the dispensation granted.

1707
1707. § 1 . When the death of one spouse cannot be proven by an authentic document, ecclesiastical or civil, the other spouse cannot be considered free from the marriage bond before the diocesan Bishop has issued the declaration of presumed death.
§ 2 . The diocesan Bishop can only issue the declaration referred to in § 1 when, after carrying out the appropriate investigations, through the statements of witnesses, through fame or through evidence, he reaches moral certainty about the death of the spouse. The mere fact of the spouse's absence is not enough, even if it lasts for a long time.
§ 3 . In doubtful and complicated cases, the Bishop must consult the Apostolic See.

1708
1708. The clergyman himself, the Ordinary on whom he depends, or the person of the diocese where he was ordained have the right to accuse the validity of the sacred ordination.

1709
1709. § 1 . The prayers must be sent to the competent Congregation, which will decide whether the cause will be heard by the Congregation of the Roman Curia itself or by a tribunal designated by it.
§ 2 . Once the petition is sent, the clergyman is ipso jure prohibited from exercising his orders.

1710
1710. If the Congregation refers the case to a court, the canons on trials in general and on ordinary contentious trials must be observed, unless the nature of the matter prevents it, leaving the prescriptions of this title without prejudice.

1711
1711. In these cases, the defender of the bond enjoys the same rights and has the same obligations as the defender of the marriage bond.

1712
1712. After a second sentence confirming the nullity of the sacred ordination, the cleric loses all the rights of the clerical state and is free from all his obligations.

1713
1713. To avoid judicial disputes, it is useful to use compromise or reconciliation, or submit the controversy to the judgment of one or more arbitrators.

1714
1714. For the transaction, the commitment and the arbitration trial, the norms established by the parties will be observed or, failing this, the law given by the Episcopal Conference, if there is one, or the civil law in force in the place where the agreement is concluded.

1715
1715. § 1 . No transaction or commitment can be validly made on what belongs to the public good or on other things that the parties cannot freely dispose of.
§ 2 . When dealing with temporary ecclesiastical property, the solemnities required by law for the alienation of ecclesiastical property must be completed, whenever its purpose requires it.

1716
1716. § 1 . If the civil law does not recognize the effectiveness of the arbitration ruling that is not confirmed by the judge, for the arbitration ruling on an ecclesiastical controversy to be effective in the canonical jurisdiction, it also needs confirmation by the ecclesiastical judge of the place in which it was given.
§ 2 . If the civil law allows the challenge of the arbitration ruling before the civil judge, in the canonical jurisdiction the same challenge can be proposed before the ecclesiastical judge who is competent to judge the controversy in the first instance.

1717
1717. § 1 . Whenever the Ordinary has at least credible news of a crime, he must carefully investigate, personally or through a suitable person, the facts and their circumstances as well as the imputability, unless this investigation seems completely superfluous.
§ 2 . We must prevent someone's good reputation from being put at risk as a result of this investigation.
§ 3 . Whoever carries out the investigation has the same powers and identical obligations as the auditor in a process; and, if a judicial process is carried out afterwards, he cannot perform the role of the judge in it.

1718
1718. § 1 . When it is estimated that sufficient elements have already been gathered, the Ordinary determines:
1 whether the process to inflict or declare a penalty can be launched;
2 if it is appropriate to do so, keeping in mind c. 1341;
3 whether the judicial process should be used or, when the law does not prohibit it, proceeding by extrajudicial decree.
§ 2 . The Ordinary must revoke or modify the decree referred to in § 1, whenever, due to new elements arising, it seems to him that he should decide otherwise.
§ 3 . When giving the decrees referred to in §§ 1 and 2, it is appropriate that the Ordinary, according to his prudence, hear two judges or other legal experts.
§ 4 . Before making a determination in accordance with § 1, the Ordinary must consider whether, to avoid useless lawsuits, it is advisable that, with the consent of the parties, he himself or the investigator settle the matter regarding damages in accordance with equity.

1719
1719. If they are not required for the criminal process, the minutes of the investigation and the decrees of the Ordinary with which the investigation begins or concludes, as well as everything that precedes the investigation, must be kept in the secret archive of the curia.

1720
1720. If the Ordinary deems that it should be proceeded by extrajudicial decree:
1 will inform the accused of the accusation and the evidence, giving him the opportunity to defend himself, unless the accused, legitimately summoned, does not wish to appear;
2 must carefully weigh all evidence and arguments with two advisors;
3 if the crime is established with certainty and the criminal action has not been extinguished, a decree will be issued in accordance with cc. 1342-1350, setting out, at least briefly, the legal and factual reasons.

1721
1721. § 1 . If the Ordinary decrees that a criminal judicial process must be initiated, he will deliver the minutes of the investigation to the promoter of justice, so that he can present the accusatory document to the judge, in accordance with the cc

1722
1722. To avoid scandals, defend the freedom of witnesses and guarantee the course of justice, the Ordinary may, after hearing the promoter of justice and having summoned the accused, remove him, at any stage of the process, from the exercise of the sacred ministry or an ecclesiastical office or office, impose or prohibit him from residing in a place or territory, or also prohibit him from publicly receiving the Holy Eucharist, but all these provisions must be revoked when the cause that causes them ceases. motivated, and cease ipso jure to have force at the end of the criminal process.

1723
1723. § 1 . When summoning the prisoner, the judge must invite him to appoint a lawyer, in accordance with the c

1724
1724. § 1 . The promoter of justice may renounce the instance at any stage of the trial, by order or with the consent of the Ordinary who made the decision to initiate the process.
§ 2 . For the resignation to be valid, it must be accepted by the prisoner, unless he has been declared absent from the trial.

1725
1725. In the discussion of the case, whether in writing or orally, the accused always has the right to write or speak last, either personally or through his lawyer or attorney.

1726
1726. In any degree and phase of the criminal trial, if it is clearly established that the crime has not been committed by the accused, the judge must declare it so by means of a sentence and acquit the accused, even if it is at the same time stated that the criminal action has been extinguished.

1727
1727. § 1 . The prisoner may appeal, even when the sentence had not convicted him only because it was an optional sentence, or because the judge made use of the power mentioned in the ccs.

1728
1728. § 1 . Subject to the canons of this title, in the criminal trial the canons on trials in general and the ordinary contentious trial must be applied, if the nature of the matter does not prevent it, complying with the special rules regarding causes that refer to the public good.
§ 2 . The accused is not obliged to confess to the crime, nor can he be required to swear an oath.

1729
1729. § 1 . The injured party may exercise contentious action in the same criminal trial for compensation for the damages caused by the crime, in accordance with c. 1596.
§ 2 . The intervention of the injured party, referred to in § 1, is not admitted if it was not carried out in the first instance of the trial.
§ 3 . In a case for damages, the appeal is made in accordance with cc. 1628-1640, even when the appeal does not fit in the criminal process; and if both appeals are proposed, even if they are by different parties, a single appeal trial will be held, except as prescribed in c. 1730.

1730
1730. § 1 . To avoid excessive delays in the criminal trial, the judge may defer the judgment on damages until he has given a final ruling in the criminal trial.
§ 2 . The judge who has acted in this way must judge the damages after issuing a ruling in the criminal trial, even if it is still pending because a challenge has been filed, and also if the defendant has been acquitted for a reason that does not exempt him from the obligation to repair the damages caused.

1731
1731. Even if it has become res judicata, the sentence given in a criminal trial does not constitute a right with respect to the injured party, unless the latter had intervened in accordance with c. 1729.

1732
1732. What is established in the canons of this section on decrees must also apply to all singular administrative acts that occur in the external extrajudicial forum, except those that emanate directly from the Roman Pontiff himself or from the Ecumenical Council itself.

1733
1733. § 1 . It is highly desirable that, when someone considers themselves harmed by a decree, conflict between them and the author of the decree is avoided, and that efforts are made to reach an equitable solution by common agreement, even resorting to mediation and the efforts of prudent people, so that the controversy is avoided or resolved by an appropriate means.
§ 2 . The Episcopal Conference can order that in each diocese a department or council be permanently created, which, according to the norms of the same Conference, has the function of seeking and suggesting equitable solutions; and if the Conference does not adopt that decision, the Bishop may establish that council or department.
§ 3 . The department or council referred to in § 2 will act mainly when the revocation of a decree is requested under c. 1734 and before the deadlines for appeal have expired; But if the appeal against the decree has already been filed, the same Superior who judges it must exhort the appellant and the author of the decree to seek those solutions, as long as he hopes for a happy result.

1734
1734. § 1 . Before imposing an appeal, the interested party must request its author in writing to revoke or amend the decree; Once this request is made, the suspension of the execution of the decree is also automatically considered requested.
§ 2 . The request must be made within the peremptory period of ten working days from the legitimate notification of the decree.
§ 3 . The rules of §§ 1 and 2 are not valid when it comes to:
1 to appeal to the Bishop against the decrees given by the authorities that are subordinate to him;
2 to appeal against the decree that decides on a hierarchical appeal, unless this decision is issued by the Bishop;
3 to file the resources referred to in cc. 57 and 1735.
1734. produces the same effect.
§ 2 . In other cases, if, within ten days after receiving the request from c. 1734, the author of the decree does not decide to suspend its execution, this suspension can be provisionally requested from his hierarchical Superior, who has the power to grant it only for serious reasons and always taking care that the good of souls is not detrimental.
§ 3 . When the execution of a decree has been suspended in accordance with the § 2, if the appeal is subsequently filed, the person who must resolve it will decide whether the suspension should be confirmed or revoked, in accordance with c.
1734. § 3, run from the day on which the decree has been issued, and in other cases in accordance with c. 1735.
§ 3 . Even in cases in which the appeal does not ipso jure suspend the execution of the decree, nor has the suspension been decreed according to c.

1735
1735. If the author of the decree, within thirty days from receiving the petition mentioned in c. 1734, issues a new decree by which it corrects the previous one or decides that the petition should be rejected, the deadlines for appealing are counted from the date of the notification of the new decree; but if no decision has been made within thirty days, the period is counted from the thirtieth day.

1736
1736. § 1 . When in a matter the hierarchical appeal suspends the execution of a decree, the request of the c
1736. § 2, the Superior may, for serious reasons, order that the execution be suspended, ensuring that all harm to the good of souls is avoided.

1737
1737. § 3 .
§ 4 . If no appeal is filed against the decree within the prescribed period, the suspension of execution provisionally decided in accordance with §§ 1 or 2 therefore ceases.
1737. § 1 . Whoever considers himself harmed by a decree may appeal for any fair reason to the hierarchical superior of the person who issued the decree; The appeal can be filed before the same author of the decree who must immediately transmit it to the competent hierarchical superior.
§ 2 . The appeal must be filed within the peremptory period of fifteen working days, which, in the cases dealt with in c.

1738
1738. The appellant always has the right to use a lawyer or attorney, but avoiding useless delays; and even an ex-officio patron must be appointed, if the appellant lacks one and the Superior considers it necessary; but at any time the Superior may order the same appellant to appear for questioning.

1739
1739. As the case requires, the Superior who resolves the appeal may not only confirm or declare the decree null and void, but also rescind or revoke it or, if he deems it more appropriate, correct it, replace it with another or abrogate it.

1740
1740. When, for any reason, even without serious fault of the person concerned, the ministry of a parish priest is harmful or at least ineffective, he may be removed from his parish by the diocesan Bishop.

1742
1742. § 1 . If the file carried out confirms the existence of one of the causes indicated in c. 1740, the Bishop will discuss the matter with two parish priests belonging to the group stably designated for this purpose by the presbyteral council, at the proposal of the Bishop; and if he later judges that the removal should be carried out, he will paternally advise the parish priest to resign within a period of fifteen days, but for validity it is necessary that he indicate the cause and the arguments.
§ 2 . Concerning parish priests who are members of a religious institute or society of apostolic life, the provisions of c.
1742. § 1 unless, due to their impossibility, others have to be appointed;
3 will finally decide whether the parish priest has to be removed or not, and will immediately issue the pertinent decree.
1742. § 1 the reasons for and against the transfer; and if even then he considers that said transfer should be carried out, he will reiterate the paternal exhortations to the parish priest.

1743
1743. The parish priest can resign not only purely and simply, but also under a condition as long as it can be legitimately accepted by the Bishop, and he really accepts it.

1744
1744. § 1 . If the parish priest does not respond within the established period, the Bishop will reiterate the invitation, extending the useful period to respond.
§ 2 . If it is known to the Bishop that the parish priest received the second invitation and did not respond without being affected by an impediment, or if the parish priest refuses to resign without giving any reason, the Bishop will issue the decree of removal.

1745
1745. But if the parish priest challenges the alleged cause and its reasons, alleging reasons that the Bishop considers insufficient, he, in order to act validly:
1 will invite the parish priest so that, once the file has been examined, he presents his objections in writing and provides evidence to the contrary, if he has any;
2 after this and completing the file if necessary, he will study the matter with the parish priests referred to in c.

1746
1746. The Bishop must provide for the needs of the removed parish priest, either by entrusting him with another office, if he is suitable, or by means of a pension, as the case warrants and circumstances permit.

1747
1747. § 1 . The removed parish priest must refrain from exercising the parish function, leave the parish house free as soon as possible and hand over all the belongings of the parish to the person to whom the Bishop has entrusted it.
§ 2 . But if it is a case of a sick person, who cannot move without difficulty from the parish house to another place, the Bishop will allow him its use, which may be exclusive, while that need lasts.
§ 3 . While the appeal against the decree of removal is pending, the Bishop cannot appoint a new parish priest, but must provide temporarily through a parish administrator.

1748
1748. When the good of souls or the need or usefulness of the Church requires that a parish priest be transferred from the parish that he governs with fruit, to another parish or to another office, the Bishop will propose the transfer in writing, advising him to agree for the love of God and souls.

1749
1749. If the parish priest is not willing to follow the advice and exhortations of the Bishop, he must explain in writing his reasons for this.

1750
1750. If, despite the reasons given, the Bishop judges that he should not modify his decision, he will examine with two parish priests chosen according to the c

1751
1751. § 1 . Once these procedures are concluded, if the parish priest continues to refuse and the Bishop considers that the transfer should be made, he will issue the corresponding decree, providing that the parish will be vacant at the end of the period determined.
§ 2 . Once that period has elapsed unnecessarily, the parish will be declared vacant.

1752
1752. In cases of transfer, c. 1747, maintaining canonical equity and taking into account the salvation of souls, which must always be the supreme law in the Church.
