1
1. The Church, a pilgrim people, enters the third millennium of the Christian era guided by Christ, the "great Shepherd" ( [+[0]+] ): He is the Holy Door ( [+[1]+] ) that we crossed during the Great Jubilee of the year 2000. Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life ( [+[2]+] ): contemplating the Face of the Lord, we confirm our faith and our hope in Him, the only Savior and end of the history.

2
2. At this dawn of the third millennium, the Church never tires of announcing the Gospel that gives salvation and authentic freedom also in temporal things, remembering the solemn recommendation addressed by Saint Paul to his disciple Timothy: "Proclaim the Word, insist in season and out of season, rebuke, threaten, exhort with all patience and doctrine." Because a time will come when men will not endure sound doctrine, but, carried away by their own passions, they will acquire a multitude of teachers out of the desire to hear new things; They will turn their ears away from the truth and turn to fables. You, however, behave with prudence in everything, endure suffering, perform the function of evangelizer, carry out your ministry perfectly » ( [+[0]+] ).

3
3. To the men and women of our time, its traveling companions, the Church also offers its social doctrine. In fact, when the Church "fulfills its mission of announcing the Gospel, it teaches man, in the name of Christ, his own dignity and his vocation to the communion of people; and reveals to him the demands of justice and peace, in accordance with divine wisdom. This doctrine has a profound unity, which springs from Faith in an integral salvation, from Hope in full justice, from Charity that makes all men truly brothers in Christ: it is an expression of God's love for the world, which He has loved so much "that he gave his only Son" ([+[0]+]). The new law of love encompasses all of humanity and knows no borders, because the announcement of salvation in Christ extends "to the ends of the earth" ([+[1]+]).

4
4. Discovering himself loved by God, man understands his own transcendent dignity, learns not to be content with himself and to go out to meet others in a network of increasingly authentically human relationships. Men renewed by the love of God are capable of changing the rules, the quality of relationships and social structures: they are people capable of bringing peace where there is conflict, of building and cultivating fraternal relationships where there is hatred, of seeking justice where the exploitation of man by man dominates. Only love is capable of radically transforming the relationships that human beings have with each other. From this perspective, every man of good will can glimpse the vast horizons of justice and human development in truth and good.

5
5. Love has a vast work ahead of it to which the Church also wants to contribute with its social doctrine, which concerns the whole man and is addressed to all men. There are many brothers in need waiting for help, many oppressed waiting for justice, many unemployed waiting for work, many people waiting for respect: «How is it possible that, in our time, there are still those who are dying of hunger; who is condemned to illiteracy; who lacks the most basic medical care; Who doesn't have a roof to shelter in? The panorama of poverty can extend indefinitely, if we add to the old poverty the new poverty, which often affects environments and groups not lacking economic resources, but exposed to the desperation of meaninglessness, the insidiousness of drugs, abandonment in old age or illness, marginalization or social discrimination... Can we remain on the sidelines in the face of the prospects of an ecological imbalance, which makes vast areas of the planet uninhabitable and enemies of man? Or in the face of the problems of peace, often threatened with the nightmare of catastrophic wars? Or in the face of the vilification of the fundamental human rights of so many people, especially children?

6
6. Christian love drives denunciation, proposal and commitment to cultural and social projection, to effective industriousness, which urges those who feel in their hearts a sincere concern for the fate of man to offer their own contribution. Humanity understands more and more clearly that it is linked by a single destiny that requires assuming common responsibility, inspired by an integral and supportive humanism: it sees that this unity of destiny is often conditioned and even imposed by technology or economics and perceives the need for a greater moral conscience to guide the common path. Stunned by the many technological innovations, the men of our time ardently desire that progress be oriented towards the true good of humanity today and tomorrow.

7
7. The Christian knows that he can find in the social doctrine of the Church the principles of reflection, the criteria of judgment and the guidelines for action as a basis for promoting a comprehensive and supportive humanism. Spreading this doctrine constitutes, therefore, a true pastoral priority, so that people, enlightened by it, are able to interpret today's reality and seek appropriate paths for action: "The teaching and dissemination of this social doctrine is part of the evangelizing mission of the Church."

8
8. This document aims to present, in a complete and systematic, although synthetic manner, the social teaching, which is the fruit of wise magisterial reflection and expression of the constant commitment of the Church, faithful to the Grace of Christ's salvation and loving concern for the fate of humanity. The most relevant theological, philosophical, moral, cultural and pastoral aspects of this teaching are presented here organically in relation to social issues. In this way the fruitfulness of the encounter between the Gospel and the problems that man faces in his historical path is attested.

9
9. The document presents an overview of the fundamental lines of the doctrinal "corpus" of Catholic social teaching. This picture allows us to adequately address the social issues of our time, which require taking into consideration with an overall vision, because they are issues that are characterized by an increasing interconnection, that condition each other and that increasingly concern the entire human family. The exposition of the principles of social doctrine aims to suggest an organic method in the search for solutions to problems, so that discernment, judgment and options respond to reality and so that solidarity and hope can also have an effective impact on today's complex situations. The principles demand and illuminate each other, since they are an expression of Christian anthropology, the fruit of the Revelation of the love that God has for the human person. It should be duly considered, however, that the passage of time and changing social contexts will require constant and updated reflection on the various topics presented here, to interpret the new signs of the times.

10
10. The document is proposed as an instrument for moral and pastoral discernment of the complex events that characterize our time; as a guide to inspire, at the individual and collective level, behaviors and options that allow us to look to the future with confidence and hope; as a subsidy for the faithful on the teaching of social morality. From it a new commitment may emerge, capable of responding to the demands of our time, adapted to the needs and resources of man; but above all, the desire to value, in a new perspective, the proper vocation of the various ecclesial charismas with a view to the evangelization of the social, because "all members of the Church are participants in its secular dimension." Finally, the text is proposed as an occasion for dialogue with all those who sincerely desire the good of man.

11
11. The first recipients of this document are the Bishops, who must find the most appropriate ways for its dissemination and correct interpretation. It belongs, in fact, to his "munus docendi" to teach that "according to the plan of God the Creator, the same earthly things and human institutions are also ordered to the salvation of men, and, therefore, can contribute not a little to the edification of the Body of Christ." Priests, men and women religious and, in general, formators will find in it a guide for their teaching and an instrument of pastoral service. The lay faithful, who seek the Kingdom of Heaven "by managing temporal affairs and ordering them according to God," will find light for their specific commitment. Christian communities will be able to use this document to objectively analyze situations, clarify them in light of the immutable words of the Gospel, gather principles for reflection, criteria for judgment and guidelines for action.

12
12. This Document is also proposed to the brothers of other Churches and Ecclesial Communities, to the followers of other religions, as well as to all those, men and women of good will, who are committed to serving the common good: they want to receive it as the fruit of a universal human experience, filled with innumerable signs of the presence of the Spirit of God. It is a treasure of things new and old ( [+[0]+] ), which the Church wants to share, to thank God, from whom "every good gift and every perfect gift descends" ( [+[1]+] ). It is a sign of hope that today religions and cultures express availability for dialogue and realize the urgency of uniting their own efforts to promote justice, fraternity, peace and the growth of the human person.

13
13. This document is an act of service of the Church to the men and women of our time, to whom it offers the heritage of its social doctrine, according to the style of dialogue with which God himself, in his only begotten Son made man, "speaks to men as friends ([+[0]+]), and deals with them ([+[1]+])." Inspired by the Pastoral Constitution "Gaudium et Spes", this document also places as the axis of the entire exposition man "whole whole, body and soul, heart and conscience, intelligence and will." In this task, “no earthly ambition drives the Church. He desires only one thing: to continue, under the guidance of the Spirit, the very work of Christ, who came into the world to bear witness to the truth, to save and not to judge, to serve and not to be served.

14
14. With this document, the Church wants to offer a true contribution to the question of the place that man occupies in nature and in society, scrutinized by the civilizations and cultures in which the wisdom of humanity is expressed. Sinking its roots into a past that is often millennia old, these are manifested in religion, philosophy and the poetic genius of all times and all People, offering interpretations of the universe and human coexistence, trying to give meaning to existence and the mystery that surrounds it. Who am I? Why the presence of pain, evil, death, despite so much progress? What are so many conquests worth if their price is, not infrequently, unbearable? What is there after this life? These fundamental questions characterize the journey of human existence. In this regard, we can remember the exhortation "Know thyself" sculpted on the architrave of the temple at Delphi, as testimony to the fundamental truth according to which man, called to distinguish himself among all created beings, qualifies as man precisely insofar as he is constitutively oriented to know himself.

15
15. The orientation given to existence, social coexistence and history depends, to a large extent, on the answers given to the questions about man's place in nature and society, issues to which this document tries to offer its contribution. The profound meaning of human existence, in fact, is revealed in the free search for truth, capable of offering direction and plenitude to life, a search to which these questions incessantly urge the intelligence and will of man. These express human nature at its highest level, because they involve the person in a response that measures the depth of their commitment to their own existence. These are, furthermore, essentially religious questions: «When “the why of things” is investigated in totality in the search for the ultimate and most exhaustive answer, then human reason reaches its peak and opens to religiosity. Indeed, religiosity represents the highest expression of the human person, because it is the culmination of his rational nature. It springs from man's deep aspiration for truth and is at the basis of man's free and personal search for the divine.

16
16. The radical questions that have accompanied the path of men from the beginning, acquire, in our time, even greater importance due to the breadth of the challenges, the novelty of the scenarios and the decisive choices that current generations are called to make.

17
17. The disciples of Jesus Christ know that they are questioned by these questions, they also carry them within their hearts and want to commit themselves, together with all men, in the search for truth and the meaning of personal and social existence. They contribute to this search with their generous testimony of the gift that humanity has received: God has addressed his Word to them throughout history, moreover, He Himself has entered into it to dialogue with humanity and to reveal to them His plan of salvation, justice and fraternity. In his Son, Jesus Christ, made man, God has freed us from sin and has shown us the path we must follow and the goal towards which we should head.

18
18. The Church walks alongside all of humanity along the paths of history. She lives in the world and, without being of the world ( [+[0]+] ), she is called to serve it following her own intimate vocation. This attitude—which can also be found in this document—is sustained by the deep conviction that it is important for the world to recognize the Church as a reality and leaven of history, just as it is important for the Church not to ignore how much it has received from history and the evolution of the human race. The Second Vatican Council wanted to give an eloquent demonstration of solidarity, respect and love for the human family, establishing with it a dialogue "about all these problems, clarifying them in the light of the Gospel and putting at the disposal of the human race the saving power that the Church, led by the Holy Spirit, has received from its Founder. It is the person of man that must be saved. It is human society that must be renewed.

19
19. The Church, a sign in history of God's love for men and of the vocation of the entire human race to unity in the filiation of the one Father, with this document on its social doctrine also seeks to propose to all men a humanism at the level of God's plan of love for history, an integral and supportive humanism, which can animate a new social, economic and political order, founded on the dignity and freedom of every human person, which acts in peace, justice and solidarity. This humanism can be realized if each man and woman and their communities know how to cultivate moral and social virtues in themselves and spread them throughout society, "so that they truly become new men and creators of a new humanity with the necessary help of divine grace."

20
20. Any authentic religious experience, in all cultural traditions, involves an intuition of the Mystery that, not infrequently, manages to capture some feature of the face of God. God appears, on the one hand, as the origin of what is, as a presence that guarantees socially organized men the fundamental conditions of life, putting at their disposal the necessary goods; On the other hand, it also appears as a measure of what should be, as a presence that challenges human action—both on the personal and social levels—about the use of those same goods in relationships with other men. In every religious experience, therefore, both the dimension of gift and gratuitousness, captured as something that underlies the experience that the human person makes of his existence together with others in the world, and the repercussions of this dimension on the conscience of man, who feels challenged to administer the gift received convivially and responsibly, are revealed as important elements. Testimony of this is the universal recognition of the golden rule, which expresses, on the level of human relationships, the interpellation that reaches the man of the Mystery: "Whatever you want men to do to you, do it to them too" ([+[0]+]).

21
21. Against the background of the universal religious experience, shared in diverse ways, the Revelation that God progressively makes of Himself to the people of Israel stands out. This Revelation responds in an unexpected and surprising way to the human search for the divine, thanks to the historical, punctual and incisive actions, in which God's love for man is manifested. According to the book of Exodus, the Lord addresses Moses these words: «I have well seen the affliction of my people in Egypt, and I have heard their cry in the presence of their oppressors; Well, I already know your sufferings. I have come down to deliver him from the hand of the Egyptians and to bring him up from this land to a good and spacious land; to a land flowing with milk and honey » ( [+[0]+] ). The gratuitous closeness of God - to which his very Name alludes, which He reveals to Moses, "I am who I am" ( [+[1]+] ) - is manifested in the liberation from slavery and in the promise, which becomes a historical action, from which originates the process of collective identification of the Lord's people, through the conquest of freedom and the land that God gives them.

22
22. The gratuitousness of divine action, historically effective, is constantly accompanied by the commitment of the Covenant, proposed by God and assumed by Israel. On Mount Sinai, God's initiative is reflected in the Covenant with his people, to whom he gives the Decalogue of the commandments revealed by the Lord ([+[0]+]). The “ten words” ([+[1]+]) “express the implications of belonging to God instituted by the Covenant. Moral existence is a response to the loving initiative of the Lord. It is recognition, homage to God and worship of thanksgiving. It is cooperation with the plan that God proposes in history.

23
23. From the Decalogue derives a commitment that implies not only what refers to fidelity to the only true God, but also social relations within the people of the Alliance. The latter are regulated especially by what has been called the right of the poor: "If there is a poor person among your brothers next to you... you will not harden your heart nor close your hand to your poor brother, but you will open your hand to him and lend him what he needs to remedy his need" ([+[0]+]). All this also applies with respect to the stranger: «When a stranger resides near you, in your land, do not bother him. You will regard the stranger who resides among you as one of your people and love him as yourself; for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. I, Yahweh, your God » ( [+[1]+] ). The gift of liberation and the promised land, the Sinai Alliance and the Decalogue, are, therefore, intimately linked by a praxis that must regulate the development of Israelite society in justice and solidarity.

24
24. Among the multiple provisions that tend to specify the style of gratuitousness and participation in the justice that God inspires, the law of the sabbatical year ( [+[0]+] ) and the jubilee year ( [+[1]+] ) stand out as an important orientation—although never fully realized—for the social and economic life of the people of Israel. It is a law that prescribes, in addition to the rest of the fields, the forgiveness of debts and a general liberation of people and property: each person can return to their family of origin and recover their assets.

25
25. The precepts of the sabbatical year and the jubilee year constitute a social doctrine "in nuce." They show how the principles of justice and social solidarity are inspired by the gratuitousness of the salvation event carried out by God and do not only have the corrective value of a praxis dominated by selfish interests and objectives, but rather must be, as prophetia futuri, the normative reference to which all generations in Israel must conform if they want to be faithful to their God.

26
26. Prophetic and sapiential reflection reaches the first manifestation and the very source of God's project for all humanity, when it formulates the principle of the creation of all things by God. In the Creed of Israel, affirming that God is Creator does not only mean expressing a theoretical conviction, but also capturing the original horizon of the Lord's free and merciful action in favor of man. He, in fact, freely gives being and life to everything that exists. Man and woman, created in his image and likeness ( [+[0]+] ), are therefore called to be the visible sign and effective instrument of divine gratuitousness in the garden in which God has placed them as cultivators and guardians of the goods of creation.

27
27. In the free action of God the Creator the very meaning of creation is expressed, although it is obscured and distorted by the experience of sin. The narrative of the sin of origins ( [+[0]+] ), in fact, describes the permanent temptation and, at the same time, the situation of disorder in which humanity finds itself after the fall of our first parents. Disobeying God means turning away from his gaze of love and wanting to manage one's own existence and actions in the world. The rupture of the relationship of communion with God causes the rupture of the inner unity of the human person, of the relationship of communion between man and woman and of the harmonious relationship between men and other creatures. In this original rupture we must seek the deepest root of all the evils that threaten social relations between human beings, of all the situations that in economic and political life threaten the dignity of the person, against justice and against solidarity.

28
28. Benevolence and mercy, which inspire God's actions and offer his key to interpretation, become so close to man that they take on the traits of the man Jesus, the Word made flesh. In Luke's narrative, Jesus describes his messianic ministry with the words of Isaiah that claim the prophetic meaning of the jubilee: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor; he has sent me to proclaim release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to set free the oppressed and to proclaim a year of favor from the Lord" ([+[0]+]). Jesus places himself, therefore, in the line of fulfillment, not only because he carries out what had been promised and was expected by Israel, but also, in a deeper sense, because in him the decisive event in the history of God with men is fulfilled. Jesus, in fact, proclaims: "He who has seen me has seen the Father" ([+[1]+]). Expressed in other words, Jesus tangibly and definitively manifests who God is and how he behaves towards men.

29
29. The love that animates Jesus' ministry among men is that which the Son experiences in intimate union with the Father. The New Testament allows us to penetrate into the experience that Jesus himself lives and communicates of the love of God his Father—Abba—and, therefore, into the very heart of divine life. Jesus announces the liberating mercy of God in relation to those he meets on his path, starting with the poor, the marginalized, the sinners, and invites us to follow him because He is the first who, in a totally unique way, obeys God's plan of love as his messenger in the world.

30
30. The testimony of the New Testament, with the ever new amazement of one who has been dazzled by the ineffable love of God ( [+[0]+] ), captures in the light of the full revelation of Trinitarian Love offered by the Easter of Jesus Christ, the ultimate meaning of the Incarnation of the Son and his mission among men. Saint Paul writes: «If God is for us, who can be against us? He who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all, how will he not with him graciously give us all things? » ( [+[1]+] ). Saint John also uses similar language: "In this is love: not that we have loved God, but that he loved us and sent us his Son as a propitiation for our sins" ([+[2]+]).

31
31. The Face of God, progressively revealed in the history of salvation, shines fully in the Face of Jesus Christ Crucified and Risen. God is Trinity: Father, Son and Holy Spirit, truly distinct and truly one, because they are an infinite communion of love. God's free love for humanity is revealed, above all, as the fontal love of the Father, from whom everything comes; as a free communication that the Son makes of this love, giving himself back to the Father and giving himself to men; as an ever new fruitfulness of divine love that the Holy Spirit instills in the hearts of men ([+[0]+]).

32
32. Contemplating the gratuitousness and superabundance of the divine gift of the Son from the Father, which Jesus has taught and witnessed by offering his life for us, the Apostle John captures the deep meaning and the most logical consequence of this offering: « Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we too must love one another. No one has ever seen God. If we love one another, God remains in us and his love has reached its fullness in us » ( [+[0]+] ). The reciprocity of love is demanded by the commandment that Jesus defines as new and his own: "as I have loved you, so you also love one another" ([+[1]+]). The commandment of reciprocal love traces the way to live the Trinitarian life in Christ in the Church, the Body of Christ, and transform history with Him to its fullness in the heavenly Jerusalem.

33
33. The commandment of reciprocal love, which constitutes the law of life of the people of God, must inspire, purify and elevate all human relationships in social and political life: "Humanity means the call to interpersonal communion", because the image and likeness of the triune God are the root of "the entire human ethos... whose vertex is the commandment of love." The modern cultural, social, economic and political phenomenon of interdependence, which intensifies and makes particularly evident the links that unite the human family, highlights once again, in the light of Revelation, "a new model of unity of the human race, in which solidarity must ultimately be inspired." This supreme model of unity, reflection of the intimate life of God, One in three persons, is what Christians express with the word “communion.”

34
34. The revelation in Christ of the mystery of God as Trinitarian Love is linked to the revelation of the vocation of the human person to love. This revelation illuminates the dignity and personal freedom of men and women and the intrinsic human sociability in all its depth: "Being a person in the image and likeness of God entails... existing in relation to the other "I", because God himself, one and triune, is a communion of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

35
35. Christian revelation projects a new light on the identity, vocation and ultimate destiny of the person and the human race. The human person has been created by God, loved and saved in Jesus Christ, and is fulfilled by interweaving multiple relationships of love, justice and solidarity with other people, while developing his multiform activity in the world. Human action, when it tends to promote the dignity and integral vocation of the person, the quality of their conditions of existence, the encounter and solidarity of peoples and nations, is in accordance with the design of God, who never stops showing his Love and Providence towards his children.

36
36. The pages of the first book of Holy Scripture, which describe the creation of man and woman in the image and likeness of God ( [+[0]+] ), contain a fundamental teaching about the identity and vocation of the human person. They tell us that the creation of man and woman is a free and gratuitous act of God; that man and woman constitute, through their freedom and intelligence, the created you of God and that only in their relationship with Him can they discover and realize the authentic and full meaning of their personal and social life; that they, precisely in their complementarity and reciprocity, are the image of Trinitarian Love in the created universe; that to them, as the summit of creation, the Creator entrusts the task of ordering created nature according to his design ( [+[1]+] ).

37
37. The book of Genesis offers us some foundations of Christian anthropology: the inalienable dignity of the human person, which has its root and guarantee in the creative plan of God; the constitutive sociability of the human being, which has its prototype in the original relationship between man and woman, whose union "is the first expression of the communion of human persons"; the meaning of human action in the world, which is linked to the discovery and respect of the laws of nature that God has imprinted on the created universe, so that humanity inhabits and guards it according to its project. This vision of the human person, of society and of history has its roots in God and is illuminated by the realization of his plan of salvation.

38
38. The salvation that, at the initiative of God the Father, is offered in Jesus Christ and is updated and spread by the work of the Holy Spirit, is salvation for all men and of the whole man: it is universal and integral salvation. It concerns the human person in all his dimensions: personal and social, spiritual and corporeal, historical and transcendent. It begins to be realized in history, because what is created is good and willed by God and because the Son of God has become one of us. But its fulfillment will take place in the future that God reserves for us, when together with all creation ( [+[0]+] ), we will be called to participate in the resurrection of Christ and in the eternal communion of life with the Father, in the joy of the Holy Spirit. This perspective precisely indicates the error and deception of purely immanentist visions of the meaning of history and of man's pretensions to self-salvation.

39
39. The salvation that God offers to his children requires their free response and adherence. This is what faith consists of, by which "man gives himself entirely and freely to God", responding to the preceding and superabundant Love of God ([+[0]+]) with concrete love for his brothers and with firm hope, "for faithful is the author of the Promise" ([+[1]+]). The divine plan of salvation does not place the human creature in a state of mere passivity or minority with respect to his Creator, because the relationship with God, which Jesus Christ manifests to us and into which he freely introduces us through the work of the Holy Spirit, is a relationship of filiation: the same relationship that Jesus lives with respect to the Father ([+[2]+]).

40
40. The universality and integrity of the salvation offered in Jesus Christ make inseparable the link between the relationship that the person is called to have with God and the responsibility towards one's neighbor, in each specific historical situation. It is something that the universal human search for truth and meaning has sensed, although in a confusing way and not without errors; and which constitutes the founding structure of God's Alliance with Israel, as witnessed by the tables of the Law and prophetic preaching.

41
41. Personal and social life, as well as human actions in the world, are always plagued by sin, but Jesus Christ, "suffering for us, gave us an example to follow in his footsteps and, furthermore, opened the way, by following which life and death are sanctified and acquire new meaning." The disciple of Christ adheres, in faith and through the sacraments, to the paschal mystery of Jesus, so that his old man, with his evil inclinations, is crucified with Christ. As a new creature, he is able through grace to walk according to "a new life" ([+[0]+]). It is a journey that “is valid not only for Christians, but also for all men of good will, in whose hearts grace works in an invisible way. Christ died for all, and man's supreme vocation is actually only one, that is, the divine. Consequently, we must believe that the Holy Spirit offers everyone the possibility that, in the way known only to God, they associate themselves with this paschal mystery.

42
42. The interior transformation of the human person, in his progressive conformation with Christ, is the essential presupposition of a real renewal of his relationships with other people: "It is then necessary to appeal to the spiritual and moral capacities of the person and to the permanent demand for his interior conversion to obtain social changes that are truly at his service. The recognized priority to the conversion of the heart does not eliminate in any way, but, on the contrary, imposes the obligation to introduce into the institutions and conditions of life, when they lead to sin, the appropriate improvements so that they conform to the norms of justice and favor the good instead of opposing it.

43
43. It is not possible to love one's neighbor as oneself and persevere in this attitude, without the firm and constant determination to strive to achieve the good of everyone and each one, because we are all truly responsible for everyone. According to the conciliar teaching, "those who feel or act differently from us in social, political and even religious matters, must also be the object of our respect and love." The more human and charitable our intimate understanding of their way of feeling is, the greater the ease of establishing dialogue with them will be. On this path, grace is necessary, which God offers to man to help him overcome his failures, to tear him away from the spiral of lies and violence, to sustain him and encourage him to reweave, with renewed availability, a network of authentic and sincere relationships with his fellow men.

44
44. Also the relationship with the created universe and the various activities that man dedicates to its care and transformation, daily threatened by pride and disordered love of self, must be purified and perfected by the cross and the resurrection of Christ. «Man, redeemed by Christ and made, in the Holy Spirit, a new creature, can and must love the things created by God. Well, he receives them from God and looks at them and respects them as objects that came from the hands of God. Giving thanks to the Benefactor for them and using and enjoying the creatures in poverty and with freedom of spirit, he truly enters into possession of the world as one who has nothing and is the owner of everything: Everything is yours; you are Christ's, and Christ is God's ( [+[0]+] )."

45
45. Jesus Christ is the Son of God made man in whom and thanks to whom the world and man reach their authentic and full truth. The mystery of the infinite closeness of God to man—realized in the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, which goes to the point of abandoning the cross and death—shows that the more human is contemplated in the light of God's plan and lived in communion with Him, the more it is empowered and liberated in its identity and in the very freedom that is its own. Participation in the filial life of Christ, made possible by the Incarnation and by the Easter gift of the Spirit, far from mortifying, has the effect of liberating the true identity and autonomous consistency of human beings, in all their expressions.

46
46. There is no conflict between God and man, but rather a relationship of love in which the world and the fruits of man's action in the world are the object of a reciprocal gift between the Father and the children, and the children among themselves, in Christ Jesus: in Him, and thanks to Him, the world and man reach their authentic and original meaning. In a universal vision of the love of God that reaches all that exists, God himself has revealed himself to us in Christ as Father and giver of life, and man as the one who, in Christ, receives everything from God as a gift, with humility and freedom, and truly possesses everything as his own, when he knows and lives all things as coming from God, created by God and intended for God. In this regard, the Second Vatican Council teaches: "But if autonomy of the temporal means that the created reality is independent of God and that men can use it without reference to the Creator, there is no believer who misses the falsehood involved in such words. The creature without the Creator disappears.

47
47. The human person, in himself and in his vocation, transcends the horizon of the created universe, of society and of history: his ultimate goal is God himself, who has revealed himself to men to invite and admit them to communion with Him: «Man cannot give himself to a solely human project of reality, to an abstract ideal, nor to false utopias. As a person, he can give himself to another person or other people and, finally, to God, who is the author of his being and the only one who can fully accept his donation. For this reason, "the man who refuses to transcend himself and live the experience of self-donation and the formation of an authentic human community, oriented towards his ultimate destiny, which is God, is alienated." A society is alienated that, in its forms of social organization, production and consumption, makes the realization of this donation and the formation of this interhuman solidarity more difficult.

48
48. The human person cannot and should not be instrumentalized by social, economic and political structures, because every man has the freedom to orient himself towards his ultimate goal. On the other hand, every cultural, social, economic and political realization, in which the sociability of the person and its transforming activity of the universe is historically acted upon, must always be considered in its aspect of relative and provisional reality, because "the appearance of this world passes" ([+[0]+]). It is an eschatological relativity, in the sense that man and the world are directed towards a goal, which is the fulfillment of their destiny in God; and of a theological relativity, insofar as the gift of God, through which the definitive destiny of humanity and creation will be fulfilled, infinitely exceeds the possibilities and aspirations of man. Any totalitarian vision of society and the State and any purely intramundane ideology of progress are contrary to the integral truth of the human person and God's plan for history.

49
49. The Church, the community of those who are summoned by the Risen Jesus Christ and follow him, is "a sign and safeguard of the transcendent character of the human person." The Church "is in Christ like a sacrament, that is, a sign and instrument of intimate union with God and of the unity of the entire human race." Its mission is to announce and communicate the salvation achieved in Jesus Christ, which He calls "the Kingdom of God" ([+[0]+]), that is, communion with God and among men. The end of salvation, the Kingdom of God, includes all men and will be fully realized beyond history, in God. The Church has received "the mission of announcing the kingdom of Christ and of God and establishing it in all peoples, and constitutes on earth the germ and the beginning of that kingdom."

50
50. The Church places itself concretely at the service of the Kingdom of God, above all by announcing and communicating the Gospel of salvation and establishing new Christian communities. Furthermore, «it serves the Kingdom by spreading in the world “evangelical values”, which are an expression of that Kingdom and help men to choose God's plan. It is true, then, that the incipient reality of the Kingdom can also be found outside the confines of the Church, in all of humanity, as long as it lives the “evangelical values” and is open to the action of the Spirit, who blows where and how he wants ( [+[0]+] ); But it must also be said that this temporal dimension of the Kingdom is incomplete if it is not in coordination with the Kingdom of Christ, present in the Church and in tension towards eschatological plenitude. From this it follows, specifically, that the Church is not confused with the political community and is not linked to any political system. Indeed, the political community and the Church, in their own field, are independent and autonomous, although both are, in different ways, "at the service of the personal and social vocation of man." Furthermore, it can be affirmed that the distinction between religion and politics and the principle of religious freedom—which enjoy great importance at the historical and cultural level—constitute a specific conquest of Christianity.

51
51. The identity and mission of the Church in the world, according to God's project carried out in Christ, corresponds to "an eschatological and salvific purpose, which only in the future century will it be able to fully achieve." Precisely for this reason, the Church offers an original and irreplaceable contribution with the concern that drives it to make the family of men and its history more human and to position itself as a bulwark against all totalitarian temptation, showing man his integral and definitive vocation.

52
52. God, in Christ, not only redeems the individual person, but also the social relationships between men. As the apostle Paul teaches, life in Christ brings forth in a full and new way the identity and sociability of the human person, with its concrete consequences on the historical level: «For you are all children of God through faith in Christ Jesus. In fact, all of you who are baptized into Christ have put on Christ: there is no longer a Jew or a Greek; neither slave nor free; neither male nor female, since you are all one in Christ Jesus » ( [+[0]+] ). From this perspective, ecclesial communities, summoned by the message of Jesus Christ and gathered in the Holy Spirit around Him, risen ( [+[1]+] ), are proposed as places of communion, testimony and mission and as a ferment of redemption and transformation of social relations. The preaching of the Gospel of Jesus induces the disciples to anticipate the future by renewing mutual relationships.

53
53. The transformation of social relations, according to the demands of the Kingdom of God, is not established once and for all, in its concrete determinations. Rather, it is a task entrusted to the Christian community, which must develop and carry it out through reflection and praxis inspired by the Gospel. It is the same Spirit of the Lord, who leads the people of God and at the same time fills the universe, which inspires, at every moment, new and current solutions to the responsible creativity of men, to the community of Christians inserted in the world and in history and therefore open to dialogue with all people of good will, in the common search for the germs of truth and freedom disseminated in the vast field of humanity. The dynamics of this renewal must be anchored in the immutable principles of natural law, imprinted by God the Creator in each and every one of his creatures ( [+[0]+] ) and eschatologically illuminated by Jesus Christ.

54
54. Jesus Christ reveals that "God is love" ([+[0]+]) and teaches us that "the fundamental law of human perfection, and therefore of the transformation of the world, is the new commandment of love. Thus, to those who believe in divine charity, it gives them the certainty that opening the paths of love to all men and striving to establish universal brotherhood are not useless things. This law is destined to become the measure and ultimate rule of all the dynamics according to which human relationships develop. In short, it is the same mystery of God, Trinitarian Love, which founds the meaning and value of the person, of sociability and of man's actions in the world, as it has been revealed and shared with humanity, through Jesus Christ, in his Spirit.

55
55. The transformation of the world is also presented as a fundamental instance of our time. To this demand, the social doctrine of the Church wants to offer the answers that the signs of the times demand, indicating above all in the reciprocal love between men, under the gaze of God, the most powerful instrument of change, on a personal and social level. Reciprocal love, in fact, in the participation of God's infinite love, is the authentic, historical and transcendent end of humanity. Therefore, "although we must carefully distinguish temporal progress and growth of the kingdom of Christ, nevertheless, the former, insofar as it can contribute to better ordering human society, greatly interests the kingdom of God."

56
56. The promise of God and the resurrection of Jesus Christ raise in Christians the well-founded hope that a new and eternal home is prepared for all human beings, a land where justice dwells ( [+[0]+] ). "Then, death having been conquered, the children of God will be resurrected in Christ, and what was sown under the sign of weakness and corruption will be clothed with incorruptibility, and, charity and its works remaining, all the creatures that God created with man in mind will be freed from the bondage of vanity." This hope, instead of weakening, should rather stimulate diligence in work related to the present reality.

57
57. Goods, such as the dignity of man, brotherhood and freedom, all the good fruits of nature and our industriousness, spread throughout the earth in the Spirit of the Lord and according to his precept, purified from every stain, illuminated and transfigured, belong to the Kingdom of truth and life, holiness and grace, justice, love and peace that Christ will deliver to the Father and where we will find them again. Then the words of Christ will resonate for all, with all their solemn truth: “Come, blessed of my Father, receive the inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world. Because I was hungry, and you gave me food; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was a stranger, and you welcomed me; I was naked, and you clothed me; sick, and you visited me; in prison, and you came to see me... truly I say to you, whatever you did to one of the least of these brothers of mine, you did to me » ( [+[0]+] ).

58
58. The full realization of the human person, brought about in Christ thanks to the gift of the Spirit, matures already in history and is mediated by the person's relationships with other people, relationships that, in turn, reach their perfection thanks to the effort aimed at improving the world, in justice and peace. Human action in history is in itself significant and effective for the definitive establishment of the Kingdom, although it is still a gift from God, fully transcendent. This action, when it respects the objective order of temporal reality and is illuminated by truth and charity, becomes an instrument for an increasingly full and complete realization of justice and peace and anticipates the promised Kingdom in the present.

59
59. Heir of the hope of the righteous of Israel and first among the disciples of Jesus Christ, is Mary, his Mother. She, with her "fiat" to God's plan of love ([+[0]+]), in the name of all humanity, welcomes into history the envoy of the Father, the Savior of men: in the song of the "Magnificat" she proclaims the advent of the Mystery of Salvation, the coming of the "Messiah of the poor" ([+[1]+]). The God of the Covenant, sung in the joy of his spirit by the Virgin of Nazareth, is the One who brings down the powerful from their thrones and exalts the humble, fills the hungry with good things and sends away the rich empty-handed, disperses the proud and shows his mercy to those who fear him ([+[2]+]).

60
60. The Church, a participant in the joys and hopes, anxieties and sorrows of men, is in solidarity with each man and woman, from any place and time, and brings them the joyful news of the Kingdom of God, which with Jesus Christ has come and is coming among them. In humanity and in the world, the Church is the sacrament of the love of God and, therefore, of the greatest hope, which activates and sustains every project and endeavor of authentic human liberation and promotion. The Church is among men the tent of encounter with God—“God's dwelling place with men” ( [+[0]+] )—so that man is not alone, lost or afraid in his effort to humanize the world, but finds support in the redeeming love of Christ. The Church is a servant of salvation not in the abstract or in a merely spiritual sense, but in the context of history and the world in which man lives, where the love of God and the vocation to correspond to the divine project find him.

61
61. Unique and unrepeatable in his individuality, every man is a being open to relationships with others in society. Living together in the network of links that brings together individuals, families and intermediate groups, in relationships of encounter, communication and exchange, ensures a better quality of life. The common good, which men seek and achieve by forming the social community, is a guarantee of personal, family and associative good. For these reasons, society originates and is configured, with its structural arrangements, that is, political, economic, legal and cultural. The Church addresses the man "inserted in the complex web of relationships of modern society" with its social doctrine. "With the experience she has of humanity," the Church can understand him in his vocation and his aspirations, in his limits and his difficulties, in his rights and in his tasks, and has for him a word of life that resonates in the historical and social vicissitudes of human existence.

62
62. With its social teaching, the Church wants to announce and update the Gospel in the complex network of social relations. It is not simply a matter of reaching man in society—man as the recipient of the evangelical announcement—but of fertilizing and fermenting society itself with the Gospel. Caring for man means, therefore, for the Church, also caring for society in its missionary and salvific concern. Social coexistence often determines the quality of life and therefore the conditions in which each man and woman understand themselves and decide about themselves and their own vocation. For this reason, the Church is not indifferent to everything that is decided, produced and lived in society, to the moral quality, that is, authentically human and humanizing, of social life. Society and with it politics, the economy, work, law, and culture do not constitute a merely secular and mundane sphere, and therefore marginal and foreign to the message and economy of salvation. Society, in fact, with everything that is done in it, concerns man. This is the society of men, who are "the first and fundamental path of the Church."

63
63. With its social doctrine, the Church takes charge of the proclamation that the Lord has entrusted to it. It updates the message of liberation and redemption of Christ, the Gospel of the Kingdom, in historical events. The Church, announcing the Gospel, "teaches man, in the name of Christ, his own dignity and his vocation to the communion of people; and reveals to him the demands of justice and peace, in accordance with divine wisdom.

64
64. The Church, with its social doctrine, not only does not deviate from its own mission, but is strictly faithful to it. The redemption carried out by Christ and entrusted to the saving mission of the Church is certainly of a supernatural order. This dimension is not a limiting expression, but an integral expression of salvation. The supernatural should not be conceived as an entity or a space that begins where the natural ends, but as the elevation of the latter, in such a way that nothing in the order of creation and the human is foreign or excluded from the supernatural and theological order of faith and grace, but rather is recognized, assumed and elevated in it. «In Jesus Christ, the visible world, created by God for man ( [+[0]+] )—the world that, sin entering, is subject to vanity ( [+[1]+] )—acquires again the original link with the same divine source of Wisdom and Love. In fact, “God so loved the world that he gave it his only begotten Son ( [+[2]+] ).” Just as in the man-Adam this bond was broken, so in the Man-Christ it has been united again ( [+[3]+] ).

65
65. Redemption begins with the Incarnation, with which the Son of God assumes everything human, except sin, according to the solidarity instituted by the divine creative Wisdom, and achieves everything in his gift of redeeming Love. Man receives this Love in the totality of his being: corporal and spiritual, in a supportive relationship with others. The whole man—not a separate soul or a being closed in his individuality, but the person and the society of people—is involved in the saving economy of the Gospel. Carrier of the message of Incarnation and Redemption of the Gospel, the Church cannot follow another path: with its social doctrine and with the effective action that derives from it, not only does it not dilute its face and its mission, but it is faithful to Christ and reveals itself to men as "universal sacrament of salvation." Which is particularly true in an era like ours, characterized by growing interdependence and a globalization of social issues.

66
66. Social doctrine is an integral part of the Church's ministry of evangelization. Everything that concerns the community of men—situations and problems related to justice, liberation, development, relations between peoples, peace—is not alien to evangelization; This would not be complete if it did not take into account the mutual connection that constantly arises between the Gospel and the concrete, personal and social life of man. There are deep links between evangelization and human promotion: «Links of an anthropological order, because the man who must be evangelized is not an abstract being, but a being subject to social and economic problems. Ties of a theological order, since the plan of creation cannot be dissociated from the plan of redemption, which reaches very specific situations of injustice, which must be fought, and justice, which must be restored. Bonds of an eminently evangelical order such as that of charity: in fact, how can we proclaim the new commandment without promoting, through justice and peace, the true, authentic growth of man? ».

67
67. Social doctrine "has in itself the value of an instrument of evangelization" and is developed in the always renewed encounter between the evangelical message and human history. Therefore, this doctrine is a peculiar path for the exercise of the ministry of the Word and the prophetic function of the Church. «In fact, for the Church, teaching and disseminating social doctrine belongs to its evangelizing mission and forms an essential part of the Christian message, since this doctrine exposes its direct consequences in the life of society and even frames daily work and struggles for justice in the testimony to Christ the Savior.» We are not in the presence of a marginal interest or action, which is added to the mission of the Church, but at the very heart of its ministeriality: with social doctrine, the Church "announces God and his mystery of salvation in Christ to every man and, for the same reason, reveals man to himself." This is a ministry that proceeds, not only from proclamation, but also from testimony.

68
68. The Church does not take charge of life in society in all its aspects, but with its own competence, which is that of the proclamation of Christ the Redeemer: «The proper mission that Christ entrusted to his Church is not of a political, economic or social order. The purpose assigned to it is religious. But precisely from this same religious mission derive functions, lights and energies that can serve to establish and consolidate the human community according to divine law. This means that the Church, with its social doctrine, does not enter into technical issues and does not institute or propose systems or models of social organization: this does not correspond to the mission that Christ has entrusted to it. The Church has the competence that comes from the Gospel: from the message of man's liberation announced and witnessed by the Son of God made man.

69
69. With its social doctrine the Church "intends to help man on the path to salvation": this is its primary and only purpose. There are no other purposes that attempt to take over or invade other people's powers, neglecting their own, or pursue objectives foreign to their mission. This mission configures the right and duty of the Church to develop its own social doctrine and to renew society and its structures with it, through the responsibilities and tasks that this doctrine raises.

70
70. The Church has the right to be for man a teacher of the truth of faith; not only from the truth of dogma, but also from the moral truth that springs from human nature itself and from the Gospel. The proclamation of the Gospel, in fact, is not only to be heard, but also to be put into practice ( [+[0]+] ): the coherence of behavior manifests the believer's adherence and is not limited to the strictly ecclesial and spiritual sphere, since it encompasses man throughout his life and according to all his responsibilities. Although they are secular, these have man as their subject, that is, the one whom God calls, through the Church, to participate in his saving gift.

71
71. This right is at the same time a duty, because the Church cannot renounce it without denying itself and its fidelity to Christ: «Woe to me if I do not preach the Gospel! » ( [+[0]+] ). The admonition that Saint Paul addresses to himself resonates in the conscience of the Church as a call to follow all the paths of evangelization; not only those that concern individual consciences, but also those that refer to public institutions: on the one hand the religious fact must not be "erroneously reduced to the merely private sphere", on the other hand the Christian message cannot be directed towards a purely otherworldly salvation, incapable of illuminating its presence on earth.

72
72. The social doctrine of the Church has not been conceived from the beginning as an organic system, but has been formed over time, through the numerous interventions of the Magisterium on social issues. This genesis explains the fact that there may have been some oscillations regarding the nature, method and epistemological structure of the social doctrine of the Church. We find a decisive clarification in this sense, preceded by a significant indication in "Laborem exercens", in the encyclical "Sollicitudo rei socialis": the social doctrine of the Church "does not belong to the sphere of ideology, but to that of theology and especially of moral theology." It cannot be defined according to socioeconomic parameters. It is not an ideological or pragmatic system, which tends to define and compose economic, political and social relations, but rather a category of its own: it is "the careful formulation of the result of an attentive reflection on the complex realities of man's life in society and in the international context, in the light of faith and ecclesial tradition. Its main objective is to interpret these realities, examining their conformity or difference with what the Gospel teaches about man and his earthly and, at the same time, transcendent vocation, to guide Christian conduct accordingly.

73
73. Social doctrine, therefore, is of a theological nature, and specifically theological-moral, since "it is a doctrine that must guide the conduct of people." "It is situated at the intersection of Christian life and conscience with the situations of the world and is manifested in the efforts made by individuals, families, cultural and social operators, politicians and statesmen, to give them form and application in history." Social doctrine reflects, in fact, the three levels of theological-moral teaching: the founding level of motivations; the directive level of the norms of social life; the deliberative level of consciousness, called to mediate objective and general norms in concrete and particular social situations. These three levels also implicitly define the proper method and the specific epistemological structure of the social doctrine of the Church.

74
74. Social doctrine finds its essential foundation in biblical Revelation and the Tradition of the Church. From this source, which comes from above, he draws inspiration and light to understand, judge and guide human experience and history. First and foremost is God's plan for creation and, in particular, for the life and destiny of man, called to Trinitarian communion.

75
75. Faith and reason constitute the two cognitive paths of social doctrine, with two sources from which it draws: Revelation and human nature. The knowledge of faith understands and directs the life of man in the light of the historical-salvific mystery, of the revelation and gift of God in Christ for us men. The intelligence of faith includes reason, through which it, within its limits, explains and understands the revealed truth and integrates it with the truth of human nature, according to the divine project expressed by creation, that is, the integral truth of the person as a spiritual and corporeal being, in relationship with God, with other human beings and with other creatures.

76
76. The social doctrine of the Church makes use of all the cognitive contributions, coming from any knowledge, and has an important interdisciplinary dimension: "To increasingly embody, in different and continually changing social, economic and political contexts, the only truth about man, this doctrine enters into dialogue with the various disciplines that deal with man, [and] incorporates their contributions." Social doctrine uses the meaning contributions of philosophy and also the descriptive contributions of the human sciences.

77
77. Above all, the contribution of philosophy is essential, already indicated by indicating human nature as a source and reason as a cognitive path of faith itself. Through reason, social doctrine assumes philosophy in its own internal logic, that is, in the argumentation that is its own.

78
78. A significant contribution to the social doctrine of the Church also comes from the human and social sciences: no knowledge is excluded, due to the part of truth it bears. The Church recognizes and welcomes everything that contributes to the understanding of man in the network of social relationships, which is increasingly extensive, changing and complex. The Church is aware that a deep knowledge of man is not achieved through theology alone, without the contributions of many other forms of knowledge, to which theology itself makes reference.

79
79. Social doctrine belongs to the Church because the Church is the subject that elaborates, disseminates and teaches it. It is not the prerogative of a component of the ecclesial body, but of the entire community: it is an expression of the way in which the Church understands society and confronts its structures and variations. The entire ecclesial community—priests, religious and lay people—participates in the elaboration of social doctrine, according to the diversity of tasks, charismas and ministries.

80
80. In the social doctrine of the Church, the Magisterium is put into action in all its components and expressions. There is, first of all, the universal Magisterium of the Pope and the Council: it is this Magisterium that determines the direction and indicates the development of social doctrine. This, in turn, is made up of the episcopal Magisterium, which specifies, translates and updates the teaching in the concrete and peculiar aspects of the multiple and diverse local situations. The social teaching of the Bishops offers valid contributions and stimuli to the teaching of the Roman Pontiff. In this way a circularity is enacted, which in fact expresses the collegiality of the Pastors united to the Pope in the social teaching of the Church. The resulting doctrinal set encompasses and integrates the universal teaching of the Popes and the particular teaching of the Bishops.

81
81. The object of social doctrine is essentially the same as that which constitutes its reason for being: the man called to salvation and, as such, entrusted by Christ to the care and responsibility of the Church. With its social doctrine, the Church is concerned with human life in society, with the awareness that the protection and promotion of the people who constitute each of the communities depends decisively on the quality of social life, that is, on the relationships of justice and love that form it. In society, in fact, the dignity and rights of the person and peace in relationships between people and between communities are at stake. These goods must be achieved and guaranteed by the social community.

82
82. The purpose of social doctrine is religious and moral. Religious, because the evangelizing and saving mission of the Church reaches man "in the full truth of his existence, of his personal being and at the same time of his community and social being." Moral, because the Church looks towards a "full humanism", that is, the "liberation of everything that oppresses man" and the "integral development of the whole man and all men." Social doctrine traces the paths that must be taken to build a society reconciled and harmonized in justice and love, which anticipates in history, in an incipient and prefigured way, the "new heavens and new earth, in which justice dwells" ([+[0]+]).

83
83. The first recipient of social doctrine is the ecclesial community in all its members, because everyone has social responsibilities to assume. Social teaching challenges conscience in order to recognize and fulfill the duties of justice and charity in social life. This teaching is a light of moral truth, which elicits appropriate responses according to the vocation and ministry of each Christian. In the tasks of evangelization, that is, teaching, catechism, formation, which the social doctrine of the Church promotes, this is intended for every Christian, according to the competencies, charismas, offices and mission of proclamation proper to each one.

84
84. In addition to the primary and specific destination for the children of the Church, social doctrine has a universal destination. The light of the Gospel, which the social doctrine reverberates in society, illuminates all men, and all consciences and intelligences are in a position to welcome the human depth of the meanings and values ​​expressed by it and the charge of humanity and humanization of its norms of action. Thus, all, in the name of man, his one and only dignity, and his protection and promotion in society, all, in the name of the only God, Creator and ultimate end of man, are recipients of the social doctrine of the Church. The social doctrine of the Church is a teaching expressly addressed to all men of good will and, indeed, it is heard by members of other Churches and Ecclesial Communities, by followers of other religious traditions and by people who do not belong to any religious group.

85
85. Guided by the perennial light of the Gospel and constantly attentive to the evolution of society, the social doctrine of the Church is characterized by continuity and renewal.

86
86. The social doctrine of the Church is presented as an always open "workshop", in which perennial truth penetrates and permeates contingent novelty, tracing paths of justice and peace. Faith does not intend to imprison the changing socio-political reality in a closed scheme. Rather the opposite is true: faith is a ferment of novelty and creativity. The teaching that continually emerges from it "is developed through reflection matured in contact with changing situations in this world, under the impulse of the Gospel as a source of renewal."

87
87. The phrase social doctrine dates back to Pius Social concern certainly did not begin with that document, because the Church has never been disinterested in society; However, the encyclical "Rerum novarum" begins a new path: grafting itself onto a centuries-old tradition, it marks a new beginning and a substantial development of teaching in the social field.

88
88. The economic events that occurred in the 19th century had devastating social, political and cultural consequences. The events linked to the industrial revolution disrupted secular social structures, causing serious problems of justice and giving rise to the first great social question, the worker question, caused by the conflict between capital and labor. Faced with a similar situation, the Church realized the need to intervene in a new way: the "res novae", constituted by those events, represented a challenge for its teaching and motivated a special pastoral concern towards huge masses of men and women. A renewed discernment of the situation was necessary, capable of outlining appropriate solutions to unusual and unexplored problems.

89
89. In response to the first great social question, Leo XIII promulgates the first social encyclical, "Rerum novarum." This examines the condition of salaried workers, especially painful for industrial workers, afflicted by unworthy misery. The worker question is treated according to its real breadth: it is studied in all its social and political articulations, to be adequately evaluated in the light of the doctrinal principles founded on Revelation, natural law and morality.

90
90. "Rerum novarum" faced the workers' question with a method that will become a "permanent paradigm" for the subsequent development of social doctrine. The principles affirmed by Leo XIII will be taken up and deepened by successive social encyclicals. The entire social doctrine could be understood as an update, a deepening and an expansion of the original core of the principles set forth in "Rerum novarum." With this brave and far-sighted text, Pope Leo effort ».

91
91. At the beginning of the 1930s, shortly after the serious economic crisis of 1929, Pius XI published the encyclical “Quadragesimo anno”, to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of “Rerum novarum”. The Pope rereads the past in light of an economic-social situation in which industrialization had been joined by the expansion of the power of financial groups, nationally and internationally. It was the post-war period, in which totalitarian regimes were asserting themselves in Europe, while the class struggle was exasperated. The Encyclical warns of the lack of respect for freedom of association and confirms the principles of solidarity and collaboration to overcome social antinomies. The relations between capital and labor must be under the sign of cooperation.

92
92. Pius XI did not stop making his voice heard against the totalitarian regimes that took hold in Europe during his Pontificate. Already on June 29, 1931, he had protested against the abuses of the fascist regime in Italy with the encyclical "Non abbiamo bisogno." In 1937 he published the encyclical "Mit brennender Sorge", on the situation of the Catholic Church in the German Reich. The text of "Mit brennender Sorge" was read from the pulpit of all the Catholic churches in Germany, after having been disseminated with the utmost confidentiality. The encyclical came after years of abuse and violence and had been expressly requested from Pius The Pope addresses priests, religious and lay faithful, to encourage them and call them to resistance, until true peace is restored between Church and State. In 1938, faced with the spread of anti-Semitism, Pius XI stated: "We are spiritually Semites."

93
93. The Christmas Radio Messages of Pius During his Pontificate, Pius XII went through the terrible years of the Second World War and the difficult years of reconstruction. He did not publish social encyclicals, however he constantly expressed, in numerous contexts, his concern for the disrupted international order: «In the war and post-war years, the social Magisterium of Pius With his moral authority and prestige, Pius XII brought the light of Christian wisdom to an countless number of men of all categories and social levels.

94
94. The Sixties opened promising horizons: recovery after the devastations of the war, the beginning of decolonization, the first timid signs of a thaw in relations between the two blocs, American and Soviet. In this climate, Blessed John XXIII reads in depth the "signs of the times." The social issue is becoming universal and affects all countries: along with the labor issue and the industrial revolution, the problems of agriculture, developing areas, demographic increase and those related to the need for global economic cooperation are outlined. The inequalities, previously noted within Nations, now appear on the international level and show with increasing clarity the dramatic situation in which the Third World finds itself.

95
95. With the encyclical "Pacem in Terris", John XXIII highlights the theme of peace, in an era marked by nuclear proliferation. The "Pacem in Terris" also contains the first in-depth reflection of the Church on human rights; It is the encyclical of peace and the dignity of people. It continues and completes the speech of the "Mater et magistra" and, in the direction indicated by Leo The "Pacem in Terris" focuses on the public powers of the world community, called to "examine and resolve problems related to the universal common good in the economic, social, political or cultural order." On the tenth anniversary of the "Pacem in Terris", Cardinal Maurice Roy, President of the Pontifical Commission "Iustitia et Pax", sent Paul VI a letter, accompanied by a document with a series of reflections on the value of the teaching of Pope John's encyclical to illuminate the new problems linked to the promotion of peace.

96
96. The Pastoral Constitution "Gaudium et Spes" of the Second Vatican Council constitutes a significant response of the Church to the expectations of the contemporary world. In this Constitution, “in harmony with ecclesiological renewal, a new conception of being a community of believers and people of God is reflected. And it then aroused new interest in the doctrine contained in the previous documents regarding the testimony and life of Christians, as authentic means to make the presence of God visible in the world. The "Gaudium et spes" outlines the face of a Church "intimate and truly supportive of the human race and its history", which walks with all humanity and is subject, together with the world, to the same earthly fate, but which at the same time is "like leaven and like soul of society, which must be renewed in Christ and transformed into the family of God."

97
97. Another document of the Second Vatican Council of great relevance in the "corpus" of the social doctrine of the Church is the declaration "Dignitatis humanoe", in which the right to religious freedom is proclaimed. The document deals with the topic in two chapters. The first, of a general nature, affirms that the right to religious freedom is based on the dignity of the human person and that it must be recognized as a civil right in the legal system of society. The second chapter studies the topic in the light of Revelation and clarifies its pastoral implications, remembering that it is a right that does not refer only to individual people, but also to various communities.

98
98. "Development is the new name for peace", affirms Paul VI in the encyclical "Populorum Progressio", which can be considered an expansion of the chapter on economic-social life of "Gaudium et Spes", although it introduces some significant new features. In particular, the document indicates the coordinates of an integral development of man and a solidarity development of humanity: "two themes that must be considered as the axes around which the entire framework of the encyclical is structured." Wanting to convince recipients of the urgency of solidarity action, the Pope presents development as “the passage from less human living conditions to more human living conditions,” and points out its characteristics. This step is not limited to merely economic and technical dimensions, but implies, for every person, the acquisition of culture, respect for the dignity of others, the recognition "of the supreme values, and of God, who is the source and the end of them." Pursuing the development of all men responds to a demand for justice on a global scale, which can guarantee planetary peace and make possible the realization of "full humanism", governed by spiritual values.

99
99. Along these lines, Paul VI established the Pontifical Commission "Iustitia et Pax" in 1967, fulfilling a wish of the Council Fathers, who considered "very opportune to create a universal body of the Church whose function is to stimulate the Catholic community to promote the development of poor countries and international social justice." At the initiative of Paul VI, starting in 1968, the Church celebrates the World Day of Peace on the first day of the year. The Pontiff himself began the tradition of Messages that address the theme chosen for each World Day of Peace, thus increasing the "corpus" of social doctrine.

100
100. At the beginning of the 1970s, in a turbulent climate of strongly ideological contestation, Paul VI took up the social teaching of Leo The Pope reflects on post-industrial society with all its complex problems, highlighting the insufficiency of ideologies to respond to these challenges: urbanization, the condition of youth, the situation of women, unemployment, discrimination, emigration, demographic increase, the influence of social media, the environment.

101
101. On the ninetieth anniversary of "Rerum Novarum", John Paul II dedicates the encyclical "Laborem exercens" to work, as a fundamental good for the person, the primary factor of economic activity and the key to the entire social question. The « Laborem exercens » outlines a spirituality and a work ethic, in the context of a deep theological and philosophical reflection. Work must be understood not only in an objective and material sense; It is also necessary to take into account its subjective dimension, as an activity that is always an expression of the person. In addition to being a decisive paradigm of social life, work has the dignity of an area in which the natural and supernatural vocation of the person must be fulfilled.

102
102. With the encyclical "Sollicitudo rei socialis", John Paul II commemorates the twentieth anniversary of the "Populorum Progressio" and addresses again the issue of development under a double aspect: "the first, the dramatic situation of the contemporary world, under the profile of the failed development of the Third World, and the second, the meaning, conditions and demands of a development worthy of man." The encyclical introduces the distinction between progress and development, and states that "true development cannot be limited to the multiplication of goods and services, that is, to what one possesses, but must contribute to the fullness of man's "being." In this way, it aims to clearly indicate the moral character of true development. John Paul II, evoking the motto of the pontificate of Pius

103
103. On the centenary of "Rerum novarum", John Paul II promulgates his third social encyclical, the "Centesimus annus", which shows the doctrinal continuity of one hundred years of social Magisterium of the Church. Returning to one of the basic principles of the Christian conception of social and political organization, which had been the central theme of the preceding encyclical, the Pope writes: « the principle that today we call solidarity... Leo XIII enunciates it several times under the name of “friendship”...; by Pius John Paul II highlights how the social teaching of the Church advances on the axis of reciprocity between God and man: recognizing God in each man and each man in God is the condition of authentic human development. The articulate and profound analysis of the "res novae", and especially of the great change of 1989, with the fall of the Soviet system, manifests an appreciation for democracy and a free economy, within the framework of an indispensable solidarity.

104
104. The documents mentioned here constitute the main milestones in the path of social doctrine from the time of Leo XIII to the present day. This synthetic review would be considerably longer if it took into account all the interventions motivated by a specific theme, which have their origin in "the pastoral concern to propose to the Christian community and to all men of good will the fundamental principles, the universal criteria and the guidelines capable of suggesting the substantive options and coherent praxis for each specific situation."

105
105. The Church sees in man, in each man, the living image of God himself; image that finds, and is called to discover ever more deeply, its full reason for being in the mystery of Christ, Perfect Image of God, Revealer of God to man and of man to himself. This man, who has received from God himself an incomparable and inalienable dignity, is the one to whom the Church turns and renders him the highest and most unique service, constantly reminding him of his highest vocation, so that he may be increasingly aware of and worthy of it. Christ, Son of God, "with his incarnation has united himself, in a certain way, with every man"; For this reason, the Church recognizes as its main task to ensure that this union can be acted upon and continually renewed. In Christ the Lord, the Church points out and desires to follow the path of man herself, and invites us to recognize in everyone, near or far, known or unknown, and above all in the poor and the suffering, a brother "for whom Christ died" ([+[0]+]).

106
106. All social life is an expression of its unmistakable protagonist: the human person. Of this awareness, the Church has been able to become an authorized interpreter, on multiple occasions and in diverse ways, recognizing and affirming the centrality of the human person in all areas and manifestations of sociability: "Human society is, therefore, the object of the social teaching of the Church from the moment that it is neither outside nor above socially united men, but exists exclusively through them and, consequently, for them." This important recognition is expressed in the affirmation that "far from being an object and a purely passive element of social life", man "is, on the contrary, and must be and remain, its subject, its foundation and its end." From man, therefore, comes its origin social life that cannot renounce recognizing him as an active and responsible subject, and all expressions of society must be finalized to him.

107
107. Man, understood in his concrete historical reality, represents the heart and soul of Catholic social teaching. The entire social doctrine is developed, in effect, from the principle that affirms the inviolable dignity of the human person. Through the multiple expressions of this conscience, the Church has sought, above all, to protect human dignity against any attempt to propose reductive and distorted images; and has also repeatedly denounced his many violations. History shows that in the fabric of social relations some of man's broadest capacities for elevation emerge, but there are also nested the most execrable abuses of his dignity.

108
108. The fundamental message of Holy Scripture announces that the human person is a creature of God ( [+[0]+] ) and specifies the element that characterizes and distinguishes him in his being in the image of God: "So God created the human being in his own image, in the image of God he created him, male and female he created them" ( [+[1]+] ). God places the human creature at the center and at the summit of creation: man ([+[2]+]), shaped with the earth ([+[3]+]), God breathes into the nostrils the breath of life ([+[4]+]). Hence, "because he was made in the image of God, the human being has the dignity of a person; It is not just something, but someone. It is capable of knowing itself, of possessing itself and of giving itself freely and entering into communion with other people; and he is called, by grace, to an alliance with his Creator, to offer him a response of faith and love that no other being can give in his place.

109
109. Likeness to God reveals that the essence and existence of man are constitutively related to Him in the deepest way. It is a relationship that exists by itself and does not come, therefore, in a second moment nor is it added from outside. The whole life of man is a question and a search for God. This relationship with God can be ignored, forgotten or removed, but it can never be eliminated. Among all the creatures of the visible world, in fact, only man is "capable" of God ([+[0]+]). The human person is a personal being created by God for a relationship with Him, who can only live and express himself in this relationship, and who naturally tends towards Him.

110
110. The relationship between God and man is reflected in the relational and social dimension of human nature. Man, in fact, is not a solitary being, since "by his intimate nature, he is a social being, and he cannot live or display his qualities without relating to others." In this regard, the fact that God has created the human being as man and woman ( [+[0]+] ) is significant: "How eloquent is the dissatisfaction of which man's life in Eden is a victim, when his only reference is the plant and animal world ( [+[1]+] ). Only the appearance of the woman, that is, of a being who is bone of her bones and flesh of her flesh ( [+[2]+] ), and in whom the spirit of God the creator also lives, can satisfy the demand for interpersonal dialogue that is vital for human existence. In the other, man or woman, God himself is reflected, the definitive and satisfactory goal of every person.

111
111. Man and woman have the same dignity and are of equal value, not only because both, in their diversity, are the image of God, but, even more profoundly, because the dynamism of reciprocity that animates the "we" of the human couple is the image of God. In the relationship of reciprocal communion, man and woman deeply realize themselves by rediscovering themselves as people through the sincere gift of themselves. Their covenant of union is presented in Holy Scripture as an image of God's Covenant with men ( [+[0]+] ) and, at the same time, as a service to life. The human couple can participate, in fact, in God's creativity: «And God blessed them and said to them: “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth”» ([+[1]+]).

112
112. Man and woman are in relationship with others above all as custodians of their lives: "from each and every one I will claim the human soul" ([+[0]+]), God confirms to Noah after the flood. From this perspective, the relationship with God requires that human life be considered sacred and inviolable. The fifth commandment: "You shall not kill" ([+[1]+]) has value because only God is Lord of life and death. The respect due to the inviolability and integrity of physical life culminates in the positive commandment: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" ([+[2]+]), with which Jesus Christ obliges us to take care of our neighbor ([+[3]+]).

113
113. With this particular vocation to life, man and woman also stand before all other creatures. They can and must submit them to their service and enjoy them, but their dominion over the world requires the exercise of responsibility, it is not a freedom from arbitrary and selfish exploitation. All creation, in fact, has the value of a "good thing" ([+[0]+]) in the eyes of God, who is its Author. Man must discover and respect this value: this is a wonderful challenge for his intelligence, which must lift him like a wing towards the contemplation of the truth of all creatures, that is, of what God sees good in them. The book of Genesis teaches, in effect, that man's dominion over the world consists of giving a name to things ([+[1]+]): with naming, man must recognize things for what they are and establish a relationship of responsibility with each of them.

114
114. Man is also in relationship with himself and can reflect on himself. The Holy Scripture speaks in this regard about the heart of man. The heart precisely designates the spiritual interiority of man, that is, what distinguishes him from any other creature: God “has made all things appropriate to their time; He has also put anxiety in their hearts, without man being able to discover the work that God has done from beginning to end » ( [+[0]+] ). The heart ultimately indicates man's own spiritual faculties, his prerogatives as created in the image of his Creator: reason, the discernment of good and evil, free will. When he listens to the deep aspiration of his heart, every man cannot help but make his own the words of truth expressed by Saint Augustine: “You encourage him to find delight in your praise; You created us for yourself and our hearts will always be restless as long as they do not rest in you.

115
115. The admirable vision of the creation of man by God is inseparable from the dramatic picture of the sin of origins. With a lapidary statement the apostle Paul summarizes the narrative of the fall of man contained in the first pages of the Bible: "through one man sin entered the world and through sin death" ([+[0]+]). Man, against God's prohibition, allows himself to be seduced by the serpent and extends his hands to the tree of life, falling into the power of death. With this gesture man tries to push his limit as a creature, challenging God, his only Lord and source of life. It is a sin of disobedience ( [+[1]+] ) that separates man from God.

116
116. At the root of personal and social lacerations, which offend in diverse ways the value and dignity of the human person, is a wound deep within man: “We, in the light of faith, call it sin; starting with the original sin that each one carries from birth as an inheritance received from their parents, to the sin that each one commits, abusing their own freedom. The consequence of sin, as an act of separation from God, is precisely alienation, that is, the division of man not only from God, but also from himself, from other men and from the surrounding world: "the break with God leads dramatically to the division between brothers. In the description of the “first sin”, the break with Yahweh simultaneously breaks the thread of friendship that united the human family, in such a way that the following pages of Genesis show us the man and the woman as if they pointed their finger in accusation towards each other ( [+[0]+] ); and later the brother who, hostile to his brother, ends up taking his life ( [+[1]+] ). According to the narration of the events of Babel, the consequence of sin is the disunity of the human family, already begun with the first sin, and which now reaches the extreme in its social form. Reflecting on the mystery of sin it is necessary to take into account this tragic concatenation of cause and effect.

117
117. The mystery of sin involves a double wound, the one that the sinner opens on his own side and in his relationship with his neighbor. For this reason we can speak of personal and social sin: all sin is personal under one aspect; Under another aspect, all sin is social, in that it also has social consequences. Sin, in the true and proper sense, is always an act of the person, because it is an act of freedom of a particular man, and not properly of a group or a community, but each sin can unquestionably be attributed the character of social sin, taking into account that "by virtue of a human solidarity as mysterious and imperceptible as it is real and concrete, each person's sin has repercussions in a certain way on others." Therefore, a meaning of social sin that, more or less consciously, leads to blurring and almost canceling the personal element, to admit only social guilt and responsibilities, is not legitimate and acceptable. At the bottom of every sinful situation is always the person who sins.

118
118. Some sins, furthermore, constitute, by their very object, a direct attack on one's neighbor. These sins, in particular, are classified as social sins. Any sin committed against justice in the relationships between person and person, between the person and the community, and between the community and the person is social. Any sin against the rights of the human person is social, starting with the right to life, including that of the unborn, or against someone's physical integrity; all sin against the freedom of others, especially against the freedom to believe in God and worship him; every sin against the dignity and honor of others. Any sin against the common good and against its demands is social, in the entire broad sphere of the rights and duties of citizens. In short, sin is social, which "refers to the relationships between different human communities." These relationships are not always in tune with the plan of God, who wants justice, freedom and peace in the world between individuals, groups and peoples.

119
119. The consequences of sin feed the structures of sin. These have their roots in personal sin and, therefore, are always related to specific acts of people, which originate them, consolidate them and make them difficult to eliminate. This is how they strengthen, spread, become a source of other sins and condition the behavior of men. These are conditionings and obstacles, which last much longer than the actions carried out in the brief arc of an individual's life and which also interfere in the process of development of peoples, whose delay and slowness must also be judged under this aspect. The actions and postures opposed to the will of God and the good of others and the structures that these generate, seem to be above all two today: «the desire for exclusive gain, on the one hand; and on the other, the thirst for power, with the purpose of imposing one's own will on others. To each of these attitudes we could add, to characterize them even better, the expression: “at any price.”

120
120. The doctrine of original sin, which teaches the universality of sin, is of fundamental importance: «If we say: “We have no sin,” we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us» ([+[0]+]). This doctrine induces man not to remain in guilt and not to take it lightly, continually seeking scapegoats in others and justifications in the environment, heredity, institutions, structures and relationships. This is a teaching that unmasks such deceptions.

121
121. Christian realism sees the abysses of sin, but it does so in the light of hope, greater than all evil, given by the redeeming action of Jesus Christ, who has destroyed sin and death ([+[0]+]): "In Him, God has reconciled man to himself." Christ, image of God ( [+[1]+] ), is the One who fully illuminates and brings to fulfillment the image and likeness of God in man. The Word that became man in Jesus Christ has always been the life and light of man, a light that illuminates every man ( [+[2]+] ). God wants in the only mediator, Jesus Christ his Son, the salvation of all men ( [+[3]+] ). Jesus is at the same time the Son of God and the new Adam, that is, the new man ([+[4]+]): "Christ, the new Adam, in the same revelation of the mystery of the Father and his love, fully manifests man to man himself and reveals to him the sublimity of his vocation." In Him, God "predestined us to reproduce the image of his Son, so that he would be the firstborn among many brothers" ([+[5]+]).

122
122. The new reality that Jesus Christ offers is not grafted into human nature, it is not added to it from outside; On the contrary, it is that reality of communion with the Trinitarian God towards which men have always been oriented in the depths of their being, thanks to their creaturely similarity with God; but it is also a reality that men cannot achieve with their own strength. Through the Spirit of Jesus Christ, the incarnate Son of God, in whom this reality of communion has already been realized in a singular way, men are welcomed as children of God ( [+[0]+] ). Through Christ, we participate in the nature of God, who gives us infinitely more "than we can ask or think" ([+[1]+]). What men have already received is but a proof or a "pledge" ([+[2]+]) of what they will obtain completely only in the presence of God, seen "face to face" ([+[3]+]), that is, a pledge of eternal life: "This is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and your messenger, Jesus Christ" ([+[4]+]).

123
123. The universality of Christian hope includes, in addition to the men and women of all peoples, also heaven and earth: «Driller, heavens, like dew from on high, pour out, clouds, victory. Let the earth open and produce salvation, and justice germinate together. I, Yahweh, have created it » ( [+[0]+] ). According to the New Testament, in fact, the entire creation, together with all humanity, is also waiting for the Redeemer: subject to expiration, between the groans and pains of childbirth, it awaits full of hope to be freed from corruption ([+[1]+]).

124
124. Enlightened by the admirable biblical message, the social doctrine of the Church focuses, above all, on the main and inseparable aspects of the human person to capture the most important facets of its mystery and dignity. In fact, there has been no shortage in the past, and they still appear dramatically on the scene of current history, multiple reductive conceptions, of an ideological nature or simply due to diffuse forms of customs and thought, which refer to man, his life and his destiny. These conceptions have in common the fact of obfuscating the image of man by accentuating only some of his characteristics, to the detriment of all the others.

125
125. The person should not be considered only as an absolute individuality, built by himself and on himself, as if his own characteristics depended only on himself. Nor should it be considered as a mere cell of an organism willing to recognize, at most, a functional role within a system. Conceptions that distort the full truth of man have been the object, on repeated occasions, of the social concern of the Church, which has not stopped raising its voice against these and other drastically reductive visions. On the other hand, he has been concerned to announce that men "do not appear to us as detached from each other, like grains of sand, but rather united to each other in an organically ordered whole, with relationships varied according to the diversity of times" and that man cannot be understood as "a simple element and a molecule of the social organism", taking care, at the same time, that the affirmation of the primacy of the person does not entail an individualistic or mass vision.

126
126. The Christian faith, which invites us to search everywhere for everything that is good and worthy of man ([+[0]+]), "is far superior to these ideologies and is sometimes placed in a position totally contrary to them, to the extent that it recognizes God, transcendent and creator, who challenges, through all levels of creation, man as responsible freedom."

127
127. Man has been created by God as a unity of soul and body: «The spiritual and immortal soul is the principle of unity of the human being, it is that by which it exists as a whole—“corpore et anima unus”—as a person. These definitions not only indicate that the body, for which the resurrection has been promised, will share in the glory; They also remember the link of reason and free will with all corporeal and sensitive faculties. The person—including the body—is entrusted entirely to himself, and it is in the unity of soul and body that he is the subject of his own moral acts.

128
128. Through his corporeality, man unifies in himself the elements of the material world, "which through man reaches its highest peak and raises his voice for the free praise of the Creator." This dimension allows man to insert himself into the material world, the place of his fulfillment and his freedom, not like in a prison or exile. It is not lawful to despise bodily life; Man, on the contrary, "must consider his own body good and honor it, as a creature of God who will be resurrected on the last day." The corporeal dimension, however, because of the wound of sin, makes man experience the rebellions of the body and the perverse inclinations of the heart, over which he must always be vigilant so as not to allow himself to be enslaved and so as not to remain a victim of a purely earthly vision of his life.

129
129. Man, therefore, has two diverse characteristics: he is a material being, linked to this world through his body, and a spiritual being, open to transcendence and the discovery of "a deeper truth", because of his intelligence, which makes him "a participant in the light of divine intelligence." The Church affirms: «The unity of the soul and the body is so profound that the soul must be considered the “form” of the body, that is, thanks to the spiritual soul, the matter that makes up the body is a human and living body; In man, spirit and matter are not two united natures, but their union constitutes a single nature. Neither spiritualism that despises the reality of the body, nor materialism that considers the spirit a mere manifestation of matter, accounts for the complexity, totality and unity of the human being.

130
130. Openness to transcendence belongs to the human person: man is open to infinity and to all created beings. It is open above all to the infinite, that is to say to God, because with its intelligence and its will it rises above everything created and itself, it becomes independent of creatures, it is free from all created things and it is directed towards absolute truth and good. It is also open to the other, to other men and to the world, because only insofar as it is understood in reference to a you can it say I. He leaves himself, from the selfish conservation of his own life, to enter into a relationship of dialogue and communion with the other.

131
131. Man exists as a unique and unrepeatable being, he exists as an "I", capable of self-understanding, self-possession and self-determination. The human person is an intelligent and conscious being, capable of reflecting on himself and, therefore, of being aware of himself and his own actions. However, it is not intelligence, conscience and freedom that define the person, but rather it is the person who is the basis of acts of intelligence, conscience and freedom. These acts can be missing, without the man ceasing to be a person.

132
132. A just society can be realized only with respect for the transcendent dignity of the human person. This represents the ultimate goal of society, which is ordered to it: "The social order, then, and its progressive development must at all times be subordinated to the good of the person, since the real order must be submitted to the personal order, and not the other way around." Respect for human dignity cannot absolutely dispense with obedience to the principle of "considering one's neighbor as another self, taking care first of all of his life and the means necessary to live it with dignity." It is necessary that all social, scientific and cultural programs be presided over by the awareness of the primacy of each human being.

133
133. In no case can the human person be instrumentalized for purposes outside of his own development, which he can fully and definitively realize only in God and in his saving project: man, in fact, in his interiority, transcends the universe and is the only creature that God has loved for himself. For this reason, neither his life, nor the development of his thought, nor his property, nor those who share his personal and family vicissitudes can be subjected to unjust restrictions in the exercise of his rights and freedom.

134
134. Authentic social changes are effective and lasting only if they are based on a decisive change in personal behavior. An authentic moralization of social life will never be possible if it is not starting from people and in reference to them: in effect, "the exercise of moral life proclaims the dignity of the human person." It is evidently up to people to develop moral attitudes, fundamental in any truly human coexistence ([+[0]+]), which in no way can be expected from others or delegated to institutions. It is up to everyone, particularly those who in various ways are invested with political, legal or professional responsibility towards others, to be the vigilant conscience of society and the first witnesses of a civil coexistence worthy of man.

135
135. Man can turn towards good only in freedom, which God has given him as an eminent sign of his image: «God wanted to leave man in the hands of his own decision ([+[0]+]), so that he may spontaneously seek his Creator and, freely adhering to him, reach full and blessed perfection. Human dignity requires, therefore, that man act according to his conscience and free choice, that is, moved and induced by personal internal conviction and not under the pressure of a blind internal impulse or mere external coercion.

136
136. Freedom is not opposed to man's creaturely dependence on God. Revelation teaches that the power to determine good and evil does not belong to man, but to God alone ( [+[0]+] ). « Man is certainly free, from the moment he can understand and accept the commandments of God. And he has a very wide freedom, because he can eat “from any tree in the garden.” But this freedom is not unlimited: man must stop before the “tree of the knowledge of good and evil,” because he is called to accept the moral law that God gives him. In reality, the freedom of man finds its true and full realization in this acceptance.

137
137. The proper exercise of personal freedom requires certain economic, social, legal, political and cultural conditions that are, "too often, unknown and violated." These situations of blindness and injustice burden moral life and place both the strong and the weak in temptation to sin against charity. By departing from the moral law, man attacks his own freedom, chains himself, breaks brotherhood with his fellow men and rebels against divine truth. Liberation from injustice promotes freedom and human dignity: however, "above all, we must appeal to the spiritual and moral capacities of the person and to the permanent demand for interior conversion if we want to obtain economic and social changes that are truly at the service of man."

138
138. In the exercise of freedom, man performs morally good acts, which build up his person and society, when he obeys the truth, that is, when he does not pretend to be the creator and absolute owner of it and of the ethical norms. Freedom, in fact, "does not have its absolute and unconditioned origin in itself, but in the existence in which it finds itself and for which it represents, at the same time, a limit and a possibility." It is the freedom of a creature, that is, a gifted freedom, which must be welcomed like a germ and made to mature responsibly. Otherwise, it dies as freedom and destroys man and society.

139
139. The truth about good and evil is recognized in a practical and concrete way in the judgment of conscience, which leads to assuming responsibility for the good accomplished or the evil committed. « Thus, in the practical judgment of conscience, which imposes on the person the obligation to perform a certain act, the link between freedom and truth is manifested. Precisely for this reason, conscience expresses itself with acts of “judgment,” which reflect the truth about the good, and not as arbitrary “decisions.” The maturity and responsibility of these judgments—and, ultimately, of man, who is their subject—are demonstrated not with the liberation of consciousness from objective truth, in favor of a presumed autonomy of one's own decisions, but, on the contrary, with a pressing search for the truth and letting oneself be guided by it in one's actions.

140
140. The exercise of freedom implies reference to a natural moral law, of a universal nature, which precedes and unites all rights and duties. Natural law «is nothing other than the light of intelligence infused into us by God. Thanks to it we know what to do and what to avoid. God has given this light or this law to creation and consists of participation in his eternal law, which is identified with God himself. This law is called natural because the reason that enacts it is typical of human nature. It is universal, it extends to all men as established by reason. In its main precepts, the divine and natural law is set forth in the Decalogue and indicates the first and essential norms that regulate moral life. It is based on the tendency and submission to God, source and judge of all good, and on the sense of equality of human beings among themselves. Natural law expresses the dignity of the person and lays the basis for their rights and fundamental duties.

141
141. In the diversity of cultures, natural law unites men among themselves, imposing common principles. Although its application requires adaptations to the multiplicity of living conditions, depending on places, times and circumstances, natural law is immutable, "it subsists under the flow of ideas and customs and sustains its progress... Even when its principles are renounced, it cannot be destroyed or torn from the heart of man. It always resurfaces in the lives of individuals and societies.

142
142. Natural law, which is the law of God, cannot be canceled by human evil. This Law is the indispensable moral foundation to build the community of men and to develop civil law, which infers concrete and contingent consequences from the principles of natural law. If the perception of the universality of the natural moral law is obscured, a real and lasting communion with the other cannot be built, because when the convergence towards truth and good is missing, "when our acts ignore or ignore the law, whether attributable or not, they harm the communion of people, causing harm." Indeed, only a freedom that lies in common nature can make all men responsible and is capable of justifying public morality. Those who proclaim themselves the sole measure of things and truth cannot coexist peacefully or collaborate with their peers.

143
143. Freedom is mysteriously inclined to betray the openness to truth and human good and too often prefers evil and selfish closure, elevating itself to a creative divinity of good and evil: "Created by God in justice, man, however, at the instigation of the devil, in the very exordium of history, abused his freedom, rising up against God and attempting to achieve his own end apart from God ( [+[0]+] ). By frequently refusing to recognize God as his principle, man breaks his due subordination to his ultimate end, and also his entire order, both as regards his own person and his relationships with others and with the rest of creation. Man's freedom, therefore, needs to be liberated. Christ, with the force of his paschal mystery, frees man from the disordered love of himself, which is the source of contempt for his neighbor and of relationships characterized by dominance over the other; He reveals that freedom is realized in the gift of self. With his sacrifice on the cross, Jesus reintegrates man into communion with God and with his fellow men.

144
144. "God is no respecter of persons" ([+[0]+]), because all men have the same dignity as creatures in his image and likeness. The Incarnation of the Son of God manifests the equality of all people in terms of dignity: «There is no longer a Jew nor a Greek; neither slave nor free; neither male nor female, since you are all one in Christ Jesus » ( [+[1]+] ).

145
145. Only the recognition of human dignity makes the common and personal growth of all possible ([+[0]+]). To promote such growth, it is necessary, in particular, to support the last, to effectively ensure conditions of equal opportunities between men and women, to guarantee objective equality between the various social classes before the law.

146
146. "Masculine" and "feminine" differentiate two individuals of equal dignity, who, however, do not possess a static equality, because the specific feminine is different from the specific masculine. This diversity in equality is enriching and indispensable for a harmonious human coexistence: "The condition for ensuring the just presence of women in the Church and in society is a more penetrating and careful consideration of the anthropological foundations of the masculine and feminine condition, aimed at specifying the personal identity of women in their relationship of diversity and reciprocal complementarity with men, not only with regard to the roles to be assumed and the functions to be performed, but also and more profoundly, as regards refers to its personal meaning.

147
147. Woman is the complement of man, as man is of woman: woman and man complete each other, not only from a physical and psychological point of view, but also ontologically. Only thanks to the duality of the "masculine" and the "feminine" is the "human" fully realized. It is the "unity of the two", that is, a relational "uniduality", which allows each one to experience the interpersonal and reciprocal relationship as a gift that is, at the same time, a mission: "To this "unity of the two" God entrusts not only the operation of procreation and family life, but the very construction of history. " «Woman is “help” for man, as man is “help” for woman»: in their encounter a unitary conception of the human person is realized, based not on the logic of egocentrism and self-affirmation, but on that of love and solidarity.

148
148. Disabled people are fully human subjects, holders of rights and duties: "Despite the limitations and suffering engraved on their bodies and faculties, they highlight the dignity and greatness of man." Since the disabled person is a subject with all his rights, he must be helped to participate in family and social life in all dimensions and at all levels accessible to his possibilities.

149
149. The person is constitutively a social being, because that is how God who created him wanted him. The nature of man manifests itself, in effect, as the nature of a being that responds to his own needs on the basis of a relational subjectivity, that is, as a free and responsible being, who recognizes the need to integrate and collaborate with his fellow men and who is capable of communion with them in the order of knowledge and love: « A society is a group of people organically linked by a principle of unity that surpasses each one of them. An assembly that is both visible and spiritual, a society lasts over time: it collects the past and prepares the future.

150
150. Human sociability does not automatically involve the communion of people, the gift of self. Because of pride and selfishness, man discovers in himself germs of unsociability, individualistic closure and vexation of others. Any society worthy of this name can be considered truthful when each of its members, thanks to their own ability to know the good, seeks it for themselves and for others. It is out of love for one's own good and that of others that man joins together in stable groups, whose purpose is the achievement of a common good. The various societies must also enter into relationships of solidarity, communication and collaboration, at the service of man and the common good.

151
151. Human sociability is not uniform, but has multiple expressions. The common good depends, in effect, on healthy social pluralism. The various societies are called to constitute a unitary and harmonious fabric, within which it is possible for each one to preserve and develop its own physiognomy and autonomy. Some societies, such as the family, the civil community and the religious community, correspond more immediately to the intimate nature of man, others proceed rather from free will: "In order to encourage the participation of the greatest number of people in social life, it is necessary to promote and encourage the creation of associations and institutions of free initiative "for economic, social, cultural, recreational, sporting, professional and political purposes, both within each of the Nations and on a global level." This “socialization” also expresses the natural tendency that drives human beings to associate in order to achieve objectives that exceed individual capabilities. It develops the qualities of the person, in particular, their sense of initiative and responsibility. Help to guarantee their rights ».

152
152. The movement towards the identification and proclamation of human rights is one of the most relevant efforts to respond effectively to the essential demands of human dignity. The Church sees in these rights the extraordinary opportunity that our time offers so that, through their consolidation, human dignity is more effectively recognized and universally promoted as a characteristic imprinted by God the Creator in his creature. The Magisterium of the Church has not failed to positively evaluate the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, proclaimed by the United Nations on December 10, 1948, which John Paul II has defined as "a milestone on the path of the moral progress of humanity."

153
153. The root of human rights must be sought in the dignity that belongs to every human being. This dignity, innate to human life and equal in every person, is discovered and understood, above all, with reason. The natural foundation of rights appears even more solid if, in the light of faith, it is considered that human dignity, after having been granted by God and deeply wounded by sin, was assumed and redeemed by Jesus Christ through his incarnation, death and resurrection.

154
154. Human rights require protection not only individually, but as a whole: a partial protection of them would be equivalent to a kind of lack of recognition. These rights correspond to the demands of human dignity and involve, first of all, the satisfaction of the essential needs - material and spiritual - of the person: "Such rights refer to all phases of life and in any political, social, economic or cultural context. They are a unitary group, decisively oriented towards the promotion of each of the aspects of the good of the person and of society... The comprehensive promotion of all categories of human rights is the true guarantee of full respect for each of the rights. Universality and indivisibility are the distinctive lines of human rights: "They are two guiding principles that always require the need to root human rights in diverse cultures, as well as to deepen their legal dimension in order to ensure their full respect."

155
155. The teachings of John XXIII, the Second Vatican Council, and Paul VI have offered extensive indications about the conception of human rights outlined by the Magisterium. John Paul II has drawn up a list of them in the encyclical "Centesimus annus": "The right to life, of which is an integral part the right of the child to grow under the heart of the mother after having been conceived; the right to live in a united family and in a moral environment, favorable to the development of one's personality; the right to mature one's own intelligence and one's freedom through the search and knowledge of the truth; the right to participate in work to value the goods of the earth and obtain from it the sustenance of oneself and one's loved ones; the right to freely found a family, to welcome and educate children, making responsible use of one's sexuality. Source and synthesis of these rights is, in a certain sense, religious freedom, understood as the right to live in the truth of one's faith and in accordance with the transcendent dignity of one's own person.

156
156. Inseparably linked to the theme of rights is that relating to the duties of man, which finds appropriate accentuation in the interventions of the Magisterium. The reciprocal complementarity between rights and duties, inextricably linked, is frequently recalled, first of all in the human person who is their titular subject. This link also has a social dimension: "In human society, a certain natural right of each man corresponds to the duty of others to recognize and respect it." The Magisterium highlights the contradiction that exists in an affirmation of rights that does not provide for a correlative responsibility: "Therefore, those who, when claiming their rights, completely forget their duties or do not give them due importance, are similar to those who tear down with one hand what they build with the other."

157
157. The field of human rights has been extended to the rights of peoples and nations, since "what is true for man is also true for peoples." The Magisterium recalls that international law "is based on the principle of equal respect, by States, of the right to self-determination of each people and their free cooperation in view of the greater common good of humanity." Peace is based not only on respect for the rights of man, but also for the rights of peoples, particularly the right to independence.

158
158. The solemn proclamation of human rights is contradicted by a painful reality of violations, wars and violence of all kinds: first of all, genocides and mass deportations; the spread everywhere of new forms of slavery, such as human trafficking, child soldiers, exploitation of workers, drug trafficking, prostitution: "Also in countries where forms of democratic government are in force, these rights are not always fully respected."

159
159. The Church, aware that its essentially religious mission includes the defense and promotion of fundamental human rights, "highly values the dynamism of the current era, which is promoting such rights everywhere." The Church deeply notes the need to respect justice and human rights within itself.

160
160. The permanent principles of the social doctrine of the Church constitute the true and proper points of support of Catholic social teaching: it is the principle of the dignity of the human person - already discussed in the preceding chapter - in which every other principle and content of the social doctrine finds its foundation, of the common good, of subsidiarity and solidarity. These principles, expression of the complete truth about man known through reason and faith, arise "from the encounter of the evangelical message and its demands—understood in the Supreme Commandment of love for God and neighbor and in Justice—with the problems that arise in the life of society." The Church, in the course of history and in the light of the Spirit, wisely reflecting on its own tradition of faith, has been able to give such principles an increasingly exact foundation and configuration, progressively clarifying them, in the effort to respond coherently to the demands of the times and the continuous developments of social life.

161
161. These principles have a general and fundamental character, since they refer to social reality as a whole: from interpersonal relationships characterized by proximity and immediacy, to those mediated by politics, the economy and the law; from relations between communities or groups to relations between peoples and Nations. Due to their permanence over time and universality of meaning, the Church points them out as the first and fundamental parameter of reference for the interpretation and assessment of social phenomena, necessary because from them the criteria of discernment and guidance for social action can be deduced, in all areas.

162
162. The principles of social doctrine must be appreciated in their unity, connection and articulation. This requirement lies in the meaning, which the Church itself gives to its own social doctrine, of a unitary doctrinal "corpus" that interprets social realities in an organic way. Attention to each of the principles in their specificity should not lead to their partial and erroneous use, as would occur if they were invoked as a disjointed and disconnected element with respect to all the others. The same theoretical deepening and practical application of just one of the social principles clearly show their mutual connection, reciprocity and complementarity. These foundations of the Church's doctrine represent a permanent heritage of reflection, which is an essential part of the Christian message; but they go much further, since they indicate to everyone the possible ways to build a good, authentically renewed social life.

163
163. The principles of social doctrine, as a whole, constitute the first articulation of the truth of society, which challenges every conscience and invites it to interact freely with others, in full co-responsibility with everyone and with respect to everyone. Indeed, man cannot evade the question of the truth and meaning of social life, since society is not a reality foreign to his very existence.

164
164. From the dignity, unity and equality of all people derives, first of all, the principle of the common good, to which every aspect of social life must refer to find full meaning. According to a first and broad meaning, the common good is understood as "the set of conditions of social life that make possible for associations and each of their members the fullest and easiest achievement of their own perfection."

165
165. A society that, at all its levels, positively wants to be at the service of human beings is one that proposes the common good as its priority goal, as the good of all men and of the whole man. The person cannot find fulfillment only in himself, that is, do without his being "with" and "for" others. This truth imposes not a simple coexistence at the various levels of social and relational life, but also the incessant search, in a practical and not only ideal way, for the good, that is, for the meaning and truth found in the existing forms of social life. No expressive form of sociability - from the family, through the intermediate social group, the association, the economic company, the city, the region, the State, to the community of peoples and nations itself - can avoid the question about the common good itself, which is constitutive of its meaning and the authentic reason for its very subsistence.

166
166. The demands of the common good derive from the social conditions of each era and are closely linked to respect and the integral promotion of the person and their fundamental rights. Such demands concern, above all, the commitment to peace, the correct organization of the powers of the State, a solid legal system, the safeguarding of the environment, the provision of essential services for people, some of which are, at the same time, human rights: food, housing, work, education and access to culture, transportation, health, free circulation of information and protection of religious freedom. Without forgetting the contribution that each Nation has the duty to make to establish true international cooperation, in view of the common good of all humanity, also keeping future generations in mind.

167
167. The common good is a duty of all members of society: no one is exempt from collaborating, according to their own capabilities, in its achievement and development. The common good demands to be fully served, not according to reductive visions subordinated to the advantages that each person can obtain, but based on a logic that assumes the corresponding responsibility in its entirety. The common good corresponds to the highest inclinations of man, but it is a difficult good to achieve, because it requires the ability and constant search for the good of others as if it were one's own good.

168
168. The responsibility of building the common good falls, in addition to private persons, also to the State, because the common good is the reason for the existence of political authority. The State, in effect, must guarantee cohesion, unity and organization to the civil society of which it is an expression, so that the common good can be achieved with the contribution of all citizens. The concrete person, the family, the intermediate bodies are not in a position to achieve their full development by themselves; From this derives the need for political institutions, whose purpose is to make accessible to people the necessary goods—material, cultural, moral, spiritual—to enjoy an authentically human life. The end of social life is the historically attainable common good.

169
169. To ensure the common good, the government of each country has the specific duty to fairly harmonize the various sectoral interests. The correct reconciliation of the private assets of groups and individuals is one of the most delicate functions of public power. In a democratic State, in which decisions are ordinarily made by majority among the representatives of the popular will, those who are responsible for government are obliged to promote the common good of the country, not only according to the guidelines of the majority, but from the perspective of the effective good of all members of the civil community, including minorities.

170
170. The common good of society is not an autarkic goal; It has value only in relation to the achievement of the ultimate ends of the person and the common good of all creation. God is the ultimate end of his creatures and for no reason can the common good be deprived of its transcendent dimension, which exceeds and, at the same time, fulfills the historical dimension. This perspective reaches its fullness in the light of faith in the Easter of Jesus, which fully illuminates the realization of the true common good of humanity. Our story—the personal and collective effort to elevate the human condition—begins and culminates in Jesus: thanks to Him, through Him and in view of Him, all reality, including human society, can be brought to its highest Good, to its fulfillment. A purely historical and materialist vision would end up transforming the common good into a simple socioeconomic well-being, lacking a transcendent purpose, that is, its deepest reason for being.

171
171. Among the multiple implications of the common good, the principle of the universal destiny of goods takes on immediate importance: «God has destined the earth and everything it contains for the use of all men and peoples. Consequently, the created goods must reach everyone equitably under the aegis of justice and with the company of charity. This principle is based on the fact that "the primordial origin of everything that is good is the very act of God who created the world and man, and who gave man the earth to dominate it with his work and enjoy its fruits ([+[0]+]). God has given the earth to the entire human race so that it can sustain all its inhabitants, without excluding anyone or privileging anyone. Here, then, is the first root of the universal destiny of the goods of the earth. This, due to its very fecundity and capacity to satisfy the needs of man, is the first gift of God for the sustenance of human life. The person, in fact, cannot do without the material goods that respond to his primary needs and constitute the basic conditions for his existence; These goods are absolutely essential to feed and grow, to communicate, to associate and to be able to achieve the highest purposes to which it is called.

172
172. The principle of the universal destination of earth's goods is at the basis of the universal right to the use of goods. Every man must have the possibility of enjoying the well-being necessary for his full development: the principle of the common use of goods is the "first principle of the entire ethical-social order" and "peculiar principle of Christian social doctrine." For this reason the Church considers it a duty to specify its nature and characteristics. It is above all a natural right, inscribed in the nature of man, and not only a positive right, linked to historical contingency; Furthermore, this right is "original." It is inherent to the specific person, to every person, and is a priority with respect to any human intervention on goods, to any legal system of the same, to any socioeconomic system and method: "All other rights, whatever they may be, including those of property and free trade, are subordinated to this [universal destination of goods]: they should not hinder, on the contrary, facilitate their realization, and it is a serious and urgent social duty to return them to their primary purpose."

173
173. The concrete implementation of the principle of the universal destination of goods, according to the different cultural and social contexts, implies a precise definition of the modes, the limits, and the objects. Universal destination and use do not mean that everything is available to each one or all, nor that the same thing serves or belongs to each one or all. Although it is true that all men are born with the right to use property, it is no less true that, to ensure a fair and orderly exercise, normative interventions are necessary, the result of national and international agreements, and a legal system that determines and specifies such exercise.

174
174. The principle of the universal destination of goods invites us to cultivate a vision of the economy inspired by moral values that allow us to always keep in mind the origin and purpose of such goods, in order to achieve a just and supportive world, in which the creation of wealth can assume a positive function. Wealth, indeed, presents this valence, in the multiplicity of forms that can express it as a result of a productive process of technical-economic elaboration of available resources, natural and derived; It is a process that must be guided by inventiveness, by the capacity for projection, by the work of men, and must be used as a useful means to promote the well-being of men and peoples and to prevent their exclusion and exploitation.

175
175. The universal destination of goods involves a common effort aimed at obtaining for each person and for all peoples the necessary conditions for integral development, so that everyone can contribute to the promotion of a more humane world, "where everyone can give and receive, and where the progress of some is not an obstacle to the development of others or a pretext for their servitude." This principle corresponds to the call that the Gospel incessantly addresses to people and societies of all times, always exposed to the temptations of the desire to possess, to which the Lord Jesus himself wanted to submit ( [+[0]+] ) to teach us the way to overcome them with his grace.

176
176. Through work, man, using his intelligence, manages to dominate the earth and make it his worthy home: "In this way he appropriates a part of the earth, which he has conquered with his work: this is the origin of individual property." Private property and other forms of private ownership of goods "ensure to each person an area absolutely necessary for personal and family autonomy and must be considered as an expansion of human freedom ([+[0]+]) by stimulating the exercise of task and responsibility, they constitute one of the conditions of civil liberties." Private property is an essential element of an authentically social and democratic economic policy and is a guarantee of a right social order. Social doctrine postulates that ownership of goods be accessible to all equally, so that everyone becomes, at least to a certain extent, owners, and excludes recourse to forms of "undivided possession for all."

177
177. Christian tradition has never accepted the right to private property as absolute and untouchable: "On the contrary, it has always understood it in the broader context of the common right of all to use the goods of the entire creation: the right to private property as subordinate to the right to common use, to the universal destiny of goods." The principle of the universal destiny of goods affirms both the full and perennial lordship of God over all reality, and the requirement that the goods of creation remain finalized and destined for the development of all man and all of humanity. This principle does not oppose the right of property, but rather indicates the need to regulate it. Private property, in fact, whatever the specific forms of the regimes and legal norms relating to it, is, in its essence, only an instrument for respecting the principle of the universal destination of goods, and therefore, in the final analysis, a means and not an end.

178
178. The social teaching of the Church urges us to recognize the social function of any form of private possession, in clear reference to the essential demands of the common good. Man "must not consider the external things that he legitimately possesses as exclusively his own, but also as common, in the sense that they benefit not only him, but also others." The universal destination of goods involves links to their use by the legitimate owners. The individual cannot act regardless of the effects of the use of his or her own resources, but must act in a way that pursues, in addition to personal and family advantages, also the common good. From this derives the duty on the part of the owners not to render the assets they possess inoperative and to use them for productive activity, even entrusting them to those who have the desire and ability to make them produced.

179
179. The current historical phase, making new goods available to society, completely unknown until recent times, requires a re-reading of the principle of the universal destiny of the earth's goods, making an extension necessary that also includes the fruits of recent economic and technological progress. The ownership of new goods, the result of knowledge, technology and knowledge, is increasingly decisive, because on it "much more than on natural resources, the wealth of industrialized nations is based."

180
180. Although in the process of economic and social development forms of property unknown in the past acquire notable prominence, traditional ones cannot, however, be forgotten. Individual property is not the only legitimate form of possession. Also of particular importance is the ancient form of community property which, also present in economically advanced countries, characterizes in a peculiar way the social structure of many indigenous peoples. It is a form of property that has a very profound impact on the economic, cultural and political life of those people, to the point of constituting a fundamental element for their survival and well-being. The defense and valuation of community property should not exclude, however, the awareness that this type of property is also destined to evolve. If action were taken only to guarantee its conservation, there would be a risk of anchoring it to the past and, in this way, putting it in danger.

181
181. A series of objective advantages derive from property for the possessing subject, be it an individual or a community: better living conditions, security for the future, greater opportunities for choice. From property, on the other hand, can also come a series of illusory and tempting promises. The man or society that reaches the point of absolutizing the right to property ends up experiencing the most radical slavery. No possession, in fact, can be considered indifferent because of the influence it exerts, both on individuals and on institutions; The possessor who carelessly idolizes his goods ( [+[0]+] ) finds himself, more than ever, possessed and subjugated by them. Only by recognizing their dependence on God the creator and, consequently, directing them to the common good, is it possible to give material goods the function of useful instruments for the growth of men and peoples.

182
182. The principle of the universal destination of goods requires that particular care be taken for the poor, for those who find themselves in situations of marginalization and, in any case, for people whose living conditions prevent them from adequate growth. For this purpose, the preferential option for the poor must be reaffirmed with all its force: «This is an option or a special form of primacy in the exercise of Christian charity, to which the entire tradition of the Church bears witness. It refers to the life of each Christian, as an imitator of the life of Christ, but it equally applies to our social responsibilities and, consequently, to our way of living and to the decisions that must be consistently made regarding the ownership and use of goods. But today, given the global dimension that the social issue has acquired, this preferential love, with the decisions it inspires in us, cannot fail to encompass the immense crowds of hungry, beggars, homeless, without medical care and, above all, without hope for a better future.

183
183. Human misery is the obvious sign of man's condition of weakness and his need for salvation. Christ the Savior took pity on her, who identified himself with his "least brothers" ([+[0]+]). «Jesus Christ will recognize his chosen ones in what they have done for the poor. The good news "announced to the poor" ([+[1]+]) is the sign of the presence of Christ.

184
184. The Church's love for the poor is inspired by the Gospel of the Beatitudes, by the poverty of Jesus and by his care for the poor. This love refers to material poverty and also to the numerous forms of cultural and religious poverty. The Church «from the beginning, and despite the failures of many of its members, has not stopped working to alleviate, defend and liberate them. He has done this through countless charitable works, which always and everywhere continue to be indispensable. Inspired by the evangelical precept: «Of grace you received it; give it of grace » ( [+[0]+] ), the Church teaches to help others in their multiple needs and lavishes in the human community innumerable corporal and spiritual works of mercy: « Among these works, alms given to the poor is one of the main testimonies of fraternal charity; "It is also a practice of justice that pleases God," even though the practice of charity is not reduced to almsgiving, but rather involves attention to the social and political dimension of the problem of poverty. The teaching of the Church constantly returns to this relationship between charity and justice: "When we give the poor essential things, we do not give them personal liberalities, but we give them back what is theirs. More than carrying out an act of charity, what we do is fulfill a duty of justice. The Council Fathers strongly recommend that this duty be fulfilled "so as not to give as help of charity what is already owed for reasons of justice." Love for the poor is certainly "incompatible with the inordinate love of wealth or its selfish use" ([+[1]+]).

185
185. Subsidiarity is among the most constant and characteristic guidelines of the social doctrine of the Church, present since the first great social encyclical. It is impossible to promote the dignity of the person if we do not take care of the family, groups, associations, local territorial realities, in short, those aggregative expressions of an economic, social, cultural, sports, recreational, professional, political nature, to which people spontaneously give life and that make their effective social growth possible. This is the scope of civil society, understood as the set of relationships between individuals and between intermediate societies, which are carried out in an original way and thanks to the "creative subjectivity of the citizen." The network of these relationships forms the social fabric and constitutes the basis of a true community of people, making possible the recognition of higher forms of sociability.

186
186. The need to protect and promote the original expressions of sociability is underlined by the Church in the encyclical "Quadragesimo anno", in which the principle of subsidiarity is indicated as a very important principle of "social philosophy": "As one cannot take from individuals and give to the community what they can achieve with their own effort and industry, so it is not just, constituting a serious damage and disturbance of right order, to take from communities minors and inferiors what they can do and provide and give to a greater and higher society, since every action of society, by its own force and nature, must provide help to the members of the social body, but not destroy and absorb them.

187
187. The principle of subsidiarity protects people from abuses by higher social authorities and urges the latter to help individuals and intermediate bodies carry out their tasks. This principle is imposed because every person, family and intermediate body has something original to offer the community. Experience confirms that the denial of subsidiarity, or its limitation in the name of an alleged democratization or equality of all in society, limits and sometimes also annuls the spirit of freedom and initiative.

188
188. Various circumstances may advise the State to exercise a substitute function. Think, for example, of situations where it is necessary for the State itself to promote the economy, due to the impossibility of civil society autonomously assuming the initiative; Also think about the realities of serious imbalance and social injustice, in which only public intervention can create conditions of greater equality, justice and peace. In light of the principle of subsidiarity, however, this institutional substitution should not be prolonged and extended beyond what is strictly necessary, given that it finds justification only in the exceptional nature of the situation. In any case, the common good correctly understood, whose demands should in no way be in contrast with the protection and promotion of the primacy of the person and its main social expressions, must remain as the criterion for discernment regarding the application of the principle of subsidiarity.

189
189. A characteristic consequence of subsidiarity is participation, which is essentially expressed in a series of activities through which the citizen, as an individual or in association with others, directly or through their own representatives, contributes to the cultural, economic, political and social life of the civil community to which they belong. Participation is a duty that everyone must fulfill consciously, responsibly and with a view to the common good.

190
190. Participation in community life is not only one of the greatest aspirations of the citizen, called to freely and responsibly exercise one's civic role with and for others, but also one of the pillars of all democratic systems, as well as one of the best guarantees of the permanence of democracy. Democratic government, in effect, is defined by the attribution, by the people, of powers and functions, which must be exercised in their name, on their behalf and in their favor; It is evident, therefore, that every democracy must be participatory. Which means that the various subjects of the civil community, at any of its levels, are informed, listened to and involved in the exercise of the functions it performs.

191
191. Participation can be achieved in all possible relationships between the citizen and the institutions: to this end, particular attention must be paid to the historical and social contexts in which participation should truly take place. Overcoming the cultural, legal and social obstacles that frequently stand in the way, as true barriers, to the solidarity participation of citizens in the destinies of their own community, requires an informative and educational work. Careful consideration deserves, in this sense, all the positions that lead the citizen to insufficient or incorrect forms of participation, and the widespread disinterest in everything that concerns the sphere of social and political life: think, for example, of the attempts of citizens to "contract" with the institutions the most advantageous conditions for themselves, almost as if these were at the service of selfish needs; and in the practice of limiting oneself to the expression of the electoral option, even going so far as to abstain in many cases.

192
192. Solidarity gives particular importance to the intrinsic sociability of the human person, to the equality of all in dignity and rights, to the common path of men and peoples towards an increasingly convinced unity. Never before has there been such widespread awareness of the bond of interdependence between men and peoples, which is manifested at all levels. The dizzying multiplication of "real-time" communication channels and means, such as telecommunications, the extraordinary progress in computing, the increase in commercial exchanges and information are testimony that for the first time since the beginning of human history it is now possible, at least technically, to establish relationships even between distant or unknown people.

193
193. The new relationships of interdependence between men and peoples, which are, in fact, forms of solidarity, must be transformed into relationships that tend towards a true ethical-social solidarity, which is the moral requirement inherent in all human relationships. Solidarity is presented, therefore, under two complementary aspects: as a social principle and as a moral virtue.

194
194. The message of social doctrine about solidarity highlights the fact that there are close links between solidarity and the common good, solidarity and the universal destiny of goods, solidarity and equality between men and peoples, solidarity and peace in the world. The term "solidarity", widely used by the Magisterium, expresses in summary the requirement to recognize in the set of links that unite men and social groups among themselves, the space offered to human freedom to take care of common growth, shared by all. Commitment in this direction translates into the positive contribution that should never be lacking to the common cause, in the search for points of possible understanding even where a logic of separation and fragmentation prevails, in the willingness to spend oneself for the good of the other, overcoming any form of individualism and particularism.

195
195. The principle of solidarity implies that men of our time cultivate even more awareness of the debt they owe to the society in which they are inserted: they are debtors of those conditions that facilitate human existence, as well as of the heritage, indivisible and indispensable, constituted by culture, scientific and technological knowledge, material and immaterial goods, and everything that human activity has produced. Such a debt is settled with the various manifestations of social action, so that the path of men is not interrupted, but rather remains open for present and future generations, both called to share, in solidarity, the same gift.

196
196. The unsurpassable summit of the indicated perspective is the life of Jesus of Nazareth, the new Man, in solidarity with humanity until the "death on a cross" ([+[0]+]): in Him it is possible to recognize the living sign of the immeasurable and transcendent love of God for us, who takes care of the illnesses of his people, walks with them, saves them and constitutes them in unity. In Him, and thanks to Him, social life can also be rediscovered, even with all its contradictions and ambiguities, as a place of life and hope, as a sign of a Grace that continually offers itself to all and that invites the highest and most compromising forms of communication of goods.

197
197. The social doctrine of the Church, in addition to the principles that must govern the construction of a society worthy of man, also indicates fundamental values. The relationship between principles and values ​​is undoubtedly one of reciprocity, in that social values ​​express the appreciation that should be attributed to those certain aspects of the moral good that the principles aim to achieve, offering themselves as points of reference for the timely structuring and orderly conduct of social life. Values ​​require, therefore, both the practice of the fundamental principles of social life and the personal exercise of virtues and, therefore, the moral attitudes corresponding to the values ​​themselves.

198
198. Men have a special obligation to continually strive towards the truth, respect it and bear witness to it responsibly. Living in the truth has an important meaning in social relationships: the coexistence of human beings within a community, in fact, is orderly, fruitful and in accordance with their dignity as persons, when it is based on the truth. The more people and social groups strive to resolve social problems according to the truth, the further they move away from arbitrariness and adapt to the objective demands of morality.

199
199. Freedom is, in man, an eminent sign of the divine image and, as a consequence, a sign of the sublime dignity of each human person: «Freedom is exercised in the relationships between human beings. Every human person, created in the image of God, has the natural right to be recognized as a free and responsible being. Every man must give each person the respect to which he is entitled. "The right to exercise freedom is a requirement inseparable from the dignity of the human person." The meaning of freedom should not be restricted, considering it from a purely individualistic perspective and reducing it to an arbitrary and uncontrolled exercise of one's own personal autonomy: "Far from being perfected in a total autarky of the self and in the absence of relationships, freedom truly exists only when reciprocal ties, regulated by truth and justice, unite people." The understanding of freedom becomes deep and broad when it is protected, also at the social level, in all its dimensions.

200
200. The value of freedom, as an expression of the uniqueness of each human person, is respected when each member of society is allowed to fulfill his or her own personal vocation; That is, you can seek the truth and profess your own religious, cultural and political ideas; express your own opinions; decide your own state of life and, as far as possible, your own work; undertake initiatives of an economic, social and political nature. All of this must be carried out within the framework of a "solid legal context", within the limits of the common good and public order and, in all cases, under the sign of responsibility.

201
201. Justice is a value that accompanies the exercise of the corresponding cardinal moral virtue. According to its most classic formulation, "it consists of the constant and firm will to give to God and neighbor what is due to them." From the subjective point of view, justice translates into the attitude determined by the will to recognize the other as a person, while from the objective point of view, it constitutes the determining criterion of morality in the intersubjective and social sphere.

202
202. Justice is particularly important in the current context, in which the value of the person, their dignity and their rights, despite the proclamations of purposes, is seriously threatened by the widespread tendency to resort exclusively to the criteria of usefulness and having. Justice, according to these criteria, is considered in a reduced form, while it acquires a fuller and more authentic meaning in Christian anthropology. Justice, in fact, is not a simple human convention, because what is "just" is not originally determined by the law, but by the deep identity of the human being.

203
203. The full truth about man allows us to overcome the contractual vision of justice, which is a limited vision, and open it to the horizon of solidarity and love: «Justice alone is not enough. Furthermore, it can come to deny itself, if it does not open itself to the deepest force that is love. In fact, along with the value of justice, social doctrine places that of solidarity, as a privileged way to peace. If peace is the fruit of justice, "today one could say, with the same exactness and analogous force of biblical inspiration ([+[0]+]), Opus solidaritatis pax, peace as a fruit of solidarity." The goal of peace, in fact, "will only be achieved with the realization of social and international justice, and also with the practice of the virtues that favor coexistence and teach us to live together, to build together, giving and receiving, a new society and a better world."

204
204. Between the virtues as a whole and, especially between the virtues, social values and charity, there is a deep link that must be recognized more and more deeply. Charity, often limited to the scope of proximity relationships, or limited only to the merely subjective aspects of acting in favor of the other, must be reconsidered in its authentic value as the supreme and universal criterion of all social ethics. Of all the paths, including those that are sought and followed to confront the ever new forms of the current social question, the "most excellent" ([+[0]+]) is the path traced by charity.

205
205. The values ​​of truth, justice and freedom are born and develop from the inner source of charity: human coexistence is orderly, fruitful in goodness and appropriate to the dignity of man, when it is based on truth; when it is carried out according to justice, that is, in the effective respect of rights and in the loyal fulfillment of the respective duties; when it is carried out in the freedom that corresponds to the dignity of men, driven by their own rational nature to assume responsibility for their own actions; when it is vivified by love, which makes the needs and demands of others feel like its own and increasingly intensifies communion in spiritual values ​​and concern for material needs. These values ​​constitute the pillars that give solidity and consistency to the edifice of living and acting: they are values ​​that determine the quality of all action and social institution.

206
206. Charity presupposes and transcends justice: the latter "must be complemented by charity." If justice is "in itself capable of serving as an "arbitrator" between men in the reciprocal distribution of objective goods according to an adequate measure, love, on the other hand, and only love ([+[0]+]), is capable of restoring man to himself."

207
207. No legislation, no system of rules or stipulations will succeed in persuading men and peoples to live in unity, fraternity and peace; No argument can overcome the appeal of charity. Only charity, in its capacity as "forma virtutum", can encourage and shape social action to build peace, in the context of an increasingly complex world. For all this to happen, it is necessary that charity be shown not only as an inspiration for individual action, but also as a force capable of generating new ways to confront the problems of today's world and to deeply renew structures, social organizations and legal systems from within. In this perspective, charity becomes social and political charity: social charity makes us love the common good and leads us to effectively seek the good of all people, considered not only individually, but also in the social dimension that unites them.

208
208. Social and political charity is not exhausted in the relationships between people, but rather it is deployed in the network in which these relationships are inserted, which is precisely the social and political community, and it intervenes on it, seeking the possible good for the community as a whole. In many aspects, the neighbor we have to love is presented "in society", so truly loving him, helping his need or his destitution, can mean something different from the good that can be wished for him on a purely individual level: loving him on the social level means, depending on the situations, using social mediations to improve his life, or eliminating the social factors that cause his destitution. The work of mercy with which one responds here and now to a real and urgent need of one's neighbor is, undoubtedly, an act of charity; But an equally indispensable act of charity is the effort aimed at organizing and structuring society so that others do not have to suffer misery, especially when this becomes the situation in which an immense number of people and even entire towns struggle, a situation that assumes, today, the proportions of a truly global social issue.

209
209. The importance and centrality of the family, in terms of the person and society, is repeatedly emphasized in Sacred Scripture: "It is not good for man to be alone" ([+[0]+]). From the texts that narrate the creation of man ( [+[1]+] ) we can see how—according to God's design—the couple constitutes "the first expression of the communion of human persons." Eve is created similar to Adam, as the one who, in her otherness, completes him ([+[2]+]) to form with him "one flesh" ([+[3]+]). At the same time, both have a procreative mission that makes them collaborators of the Creator: "Be fruitful and multiply, fill the earth" ([+[4]+]). The family is considered, in the Creator's design, as "the primary place of the "humanization" of the person and society" and "cradle of life and love."

210
210. In the family we learn to know the love and fidelity of the Lord, as well as the need to correspond to him ( [+[0]+] ); children learn the first and most decisive lessons of practical wisdom to which the virtues are linked ( [+[1]+] ). For all this, the Lord becomes the guarantor of marital love and fidelity ([+[2]+]).

211
211. Illuminated by the light of the biblical message, the Church considers the family as the first natural society, holder of its own and original rights, and places it at the center of social life: relegating the family "to a subordinate and secondary role, excluding it from its proper place in society, means causing serious damage to the authentic growth of the entire social body." The family, certainly, born from the intimate communion of life and conjugal love founded on marriage between a man and a woman, has a specific and original social dimension, as a primary place of interpersonal relationships, the first and vital cell of society: it is a divine institution, foundation of people's lives and prototype of all social organization.

212
212. The family is important and central in relation to the person. In this cradle of life and love, man is born and grows. When a child is born, society receives the gift of a new person, who is "called, from the most intimate part of oneself, to communion with others and to give oneself to others." In the family, therefore, the reciprocal dedication of the man and the woman united in marriage, creates a living environment in which the child can "develop his or her potential, become aware of his or her dignity and prepare to face his or her unique and unrepeatable destiny."

213
213. The family, the natural community where human sociability is experienced, contributes in a unique and irreplaceable way to the good of society. The family community is born from the communion of people: « “Communion” refers to the personal relationship between the “I” and the “you”. The “community”, on the other hand, overcomes this scheme by pointing towards a “society”, a “we”. The family, a community of people, is therefore the first human “society.”

214
214. The priority of the family with respect to society and the State must be affirmed. The family, at least in its procreative function, is the very condition of their existence. In the other functions for each of its members, the family precedes, due to its importance and value, the functions that society and the State must perform. The family, subject holder of inviolable rights, finds its legitimation in human nature and not in the recognition of the State. The family is not, therefore, a function of society and the State, but society and the State are a function of the family.

215
215. The family has its foundation in the free will of the spouses to unite in marriage, respecting the meaning and values of this institution, which does not depend on man, but on God himself: "This sacred bond, in view of the good of both the spouses and their children and of society, does not depend on human decision. For God himself is the author of marriage, which he has endowed with various goods and purposes. The institution of marriage—"founded by the Creator and in possession of his own laws, the intimate conjugal community of life and love"—is not a creation due to human conventions or legislative impositions, but owes its stability to divine ordering. It is born, also for society, "from the human act by which spouses give and receive each other" and is based on the same nature of conjugal love which, as a total and exclusive gift, from person to person, involves a definitive commitment expressed with reciprocal, irrevocable and public consent. This commitment requires that relationships between family members also be marked by a sense of justice and respect for reciprocal rights and duties.

216
216. No power can abolish the natural right to marriage or modify its characteristics or purpose. Marriage has its own, original and permanent characteristics. Despite the numerous changes that have taken place over the centuries in different cultures, social structures and spiritual attitudes, in all cultures there is a certain sense of the dignity of the marital union, although it is not always evident with the same clarity. This dignity must be respected in its specific characteristics, which require safeguarding against any attempt to alter its nature. Society cannot provide for the marriage bond, with which the two spouses promise each other fidelity, reciprocal assistance and openness to their children, although it is certainly responsible for regulating its civil effects.

217
217. Marriage has the following characteristic features: totality, due to which the spouses give themselves to each other in all aspects of the person, physical and spiritual; the unity that makes them "one flesh" ([+[0]+]); the indissolubility and fidelity required by reciprocal and definitive donation; the fertility to which it is naturally open. God's wise plan for marriage—a plan accessible to human reason, despite the difficulties due to the hardness of the heart ( [+[1]+] )—cannot be judged exclusively in the light of de facto behavior and concrete situations that deviate from it. Polygamy is a radical denial of God's original design, "because it is contrary to the equal personal dignity of man and woman, who in marriage give each other with total love and therefore unique and exclusive."

218
218. Marriage, in its "objective" truth, is ordered to the procreation and education of children. The marriage union, in fact, allows one to fully live the sincere gift of oneself, the fruit of which is children, who, in turn, are a gift for the parents, for the entire family and for the entire society. Marriage, however, has not been instituted solely for the purpose of procreation: its indissoluble character and its value of communion remain even when children, although strongly desired, do not crown marital life. The spouses, in this case, "can express their generosity by adopting abandoned children or performing selfless services for the benefit of their neighbors."

219
219. The baptized, by the institution of Christ, live the human and original reality of marriage, in the supernatural form of the sacrament, sign and instrument of Grace. The history of salvation is crossed by the theme of the spousal alliance, a significant expression of the communion of love between God and men and a symbolic key to understanding the stages of the alliance between God and his people. The center of the revelation of the project of divine love is the gift that God makes to humanity of his Son Jesus Christ, "the Bridegroom who loves and gives himself as the Savior of humanity, uniting it to himself as his body." He reveals the original truth of marriage, the truth of the “principle” ( [+[0]+] ) and, freeing man from the hardness of the heart, makes him capable of fully realizing it. From the spousal love of Christ for the Church, whose fullness is manifested in the consummate surrender on the Cross, springs the sacramentality of marriage, whose Grace conforms the love of the spouses with the Love of Christ for the Church. Marriage, as a sacrament, is an alliance of a man and a woman in love.

220
220. The sacrament of marriage assumes the human reality of conjugal love with all its implications and “enables and commits Christian spouses and parents to live their vocation as lay people, and, consequently, to “seek the Kingdom of God by managing temporal affairs and ordering them according to God.” Intimately united to the Church by the sacramental bond that makes it a domestic Church or small Church, the Christian family is called "to be a sign of unity for the world and to exercise in this way its prophetic function, bearing witness to the Kingdom and peace of Christ, towards which the entire world is on its way."

221
221. The family is presented as a space of communion - so necessary in an increasingly individualistic society - which must develop as an authentic community of people thanks to the incessant dynamism of love, a fundamental dimension of the human experience, whose privileged place to manifest itself is precisely the family: "Love makes man realize himself through the sincere gift of himself. "To love means to give and receive what cannot be bought or sold, but only to give freely and reciprocally."

222
222. Love is also expressed through the careful attention of the elderly who live in the family: their presence is of great value. They are an example of links between generations, a resource for the well-being of the family and of the entire society: « They can not only bear witness that there are aspects of life, such as human and cultural, moral and social values, that are not measured in economic or functional terms, but also offer an effective contribution in the workplace and in that of responsibility. In short, it is about not only doing something for the elderly, but also accepting these people as responsible collaborators, with modalities that make it truly possible, as agents of shared projects, whether in the programming, dialogue or action phase. As Holy Scripture says, people “even in old age bear fruit” ([+[0]+]). The elderly constitute an important school of life, capable of transmitting values ​​and traditions and promoting the growth of the younger ones: they thus learn to seek not only their own good, but also that of others. If the elderly are in a situation of suffering and dependence, they not only need medical care and adequate assistance, but, above all, to be treated with love.

223
223. Human beings have been created to love and cannot live without love. Love, when it is manifested in the total gift of two people in their complementarity, cannot be limited to emotions or feelings, much less to mere sexual expression. A society that tends to relativize and increasingly trivialize the experience of love and sexuality, exalts the ephemeral aspects of life and obscures fundamental values. It is more urgent than ever to announce and bear witness that the truth of love and marital sexuality is found where the full and total surrender of people with the characteristics of unity and fidelity is realized. This truth, a source of joy, hope and life, is impenetrable and unattainable as long as we remain locked in relativism and skepticism.

224
224. In relation to theories that consider gender identity as a mere cultural and social product derived from the interaction between the community and the individual, independently of personal sexual identity and the true meaning of sexuality, the Church will not tire of offering its own teaching: "It is up to each person, man and woman, to recognize and accept their sexual identity. The physical, moral and spiritual difference and complementarity are oriented towards the benefits of marriage and the development of family life. The harmony of the human couple and of society depends in part on the way in which mutual complementarity, need and support are experienced between the sexes. This perspective leads us to consider necessary the adaptation of positive law to natural law, according to which sexual identity is indisputable, because it is the objective condition for forming a couple in marriage.

225
225. The nature of conjugal love requires the stability of the marital relationship and its indissolubility. The lack of these requirements harms the exclusive and total love relationship, typical of the marriage bond, bringing with it serious suffering for the children and even negative effects for the social fabric.

226
226. The Church does not abandon to their fate those who, after a divorce, have remarried. The Church prays for them, encourages them in the spiritual difficulties that arise and supports them in faith and hope. For their part, these people, as baptized, can and must participate in the life of the Church: they are exhorted to listen to the Word of God, to frequent the sacrifice of the Mass, to persevere in prayer, to increase works of charity and community initiatives in favor of justice and peace, to educate their children in the faith, to cultivate the spirit and works of penance in order to implore, day after day, the grace of God.

227
227. De facto unions, the number of which has been progressively increasing, are based on a false concept of the freedom of choice of individuals and on a private conception of marriage and the family. Marriage is not a simple coexistence pact, but a relationship with a unique social dimension compared to others, since the family, with the care and education of children, is configured as the main and irreplaceable instrument for the integral growth of every person and for their positive insertion into social life.

228
228. A particular problem, linked to de facto unions, is that which refers to the request for legal recognition of homosexual unions, which is increasingly the subject of public debate. Only an anthropology that responds to the full truth of man can provide an adequate response to the problem, which presents various aspects on both the social and ecclesial levels. In the light of this anthropology, it is evident “how incongruous is the claim to attribute a “conjugal” reality to the union between people of the same sex. Opposed to this, above all, is the objective impossibility of making marriage bear fruit through the transmission of life, according to the project inscribed by God in the very structure of the human being. Likewise, the absence of the assumptions for the interpersonal complementarity desired by the Creator, both on the physical-biological level and on the eminently psychological level, between men and women, also opposes this. Only in the union between two sexually diverse people can the perfection of each of them be realized, in a synthesis of unity and mutual psycho-physical complementarity.

229
229. The solidity of the family nucleus is a determining resource for the quality of social coexistence. For this reason, the civil community cannot remain indifferent to the disintegrating tendencies that undermine its own foundations at the base. If legislation can sometimes tolerate morally unacceptable behavior, it should never weaken the recognition of indissoluble monogamous marriage as the only authentic form of the family. It is necessary, therefore, that public authorities "by resisting the tendencies that disintegrate society itself and are harmful to the dignity, security and well-being of citizens, ensure that public opinion is not led to underestimate the institutional importance of marriage and the family."

230
230. Conjugal love is by its nature open to the acceptance of life. In the procreative task, the dignity of the human being is eminently revealed, called to become an interpreter of the goodness and fertility that comes from God: «Human fatherhood and motherhood, even though they are biologically similar to those of other beings in nature, have in themselves, in an essential and exclusive way, a “likeness” with God, on which the family is founded, understood as a community of human life, as a community of people united in love ([+[0]+]) ».

231
231. The family founded on marriage is truly the sanctuary of life, "the environment where life, a gift from God, can be welcomed and adequately protected against the multiple attacks to which it is exposed, and can develop according to the demands of authentic human growth." The role of the family is decisive and irreplaceable in the promotion and construction of the culture of life, against the spread of a «destructive “anti-civilization”, as so many trends and de facto situations demonstrate today».

232
232. The family contributes eminently to the social good through responsible fatherhood and motherhood, peculiar forms of the special participation of spouses in the creative work of God. The burden that this responsibility entails cannot be invoked to justify selfish positions, but must guide the options of the spouses towards a generous acceptance of life: "In relation to the physical, economic, psychological and social conditions, responsible parenthood is put into practice, either with the considered and generous deliberation of having a large family, or with the decision, made for serious reasons and in respect of the moral law, to avoid a new birth during

233
233. Regarding the "means" for responsible procreation, both sterilization and abortion must be rejected as morally illicit. The latter, in particular, is an abominable crime and always constitutes a particularly serious moral disorder; Far from being a right, it is rather a sad phenomenon that seriously contributes to the spread of an anti-life mentality, dangerously threatening fair and democratic social coexistence.

234
234. The judgment about the interval between births and the number of children corresponds only to the spouses. This is one of their inalienable rights, which they exercise before God, considering their duties towards themselves, towards children already born, family and society. The intervention of public power, within the scope of its competence, for the dissemination of appropriate information and the adoption of timely demographic measures, must be carried out respecting the persons and freedom of couples: it can never replace their decisions; the various organizations working in this field can do even less.

235
235. The desire for motherhood and paternity does not justify any "right to the child", however, the rights of the unborn are evident, to whom the best conditions of existence must be guaranteed, through the stability of the family based on marriage and the complementarity of the two figures, paternal and maternal. The accelerated development of research and its technical applications in the field of reproduction raises new and delicate questions that require the intervention of society and the existence of norms that regulate this area of ​​human coexistence.

236
236. An issue of particular social and cultural importance, due to the multiple and serious moral implications it presents, is human cloning, a term that, in itself, in a general sense, means reproduction of a biological entity genetically identical to the originating one. Cloning has acquired, both in thought and in experimental praxis, diverse meanings that imply, in turn, diverse procedures from the point of view of the technical modalities of realization, as well as different purposes. It can mean the simple laboratory replication of cells or portions of DNA. But today cloning is specifically understood as the reproduction of individuals, in an embryonic state, with different modalities of natural fertilization and in such a way that they are genetically identical to the individual from which they originate. This type of cloning can have a reproductive purpose of human embryos or a purpose, called therapeutic, that tends to use these embryos for scientific research purposes or, more specifically, for the production of stem cells.

237
237. Parents, as ministers of life, must never forget that the spiritual dimension of procreation deserves a higher consideration than that reserved for any other aspect: «Paternity and motherhood represent a task that is not simply physical in nature, but spiritual; In fact, the genealogy of the person passes through them, which has its eternal beginning in God and which must lead to Him. By embracing human life in the unity of its physical and spiritual dimensions, families contribute to the "communion of generations", and thus make an essential and irreplaceable contribution to the development of society. For this reason, «the family has the right to assistance from society in relation to its duties in the procreation and education of children. Married couples with large families have the right to adequate help and should not be discriminated against.

238
238. With educational work, the family forms man in the fullness of his dignity, according to all his dimensions, including the social dimension. The family constitutes "a community of love and solidarity, irreplaceable for the teaching and transmission of cultural, ethical, social, spiritual and religious values, essential for the development and well-being of its own members and society." By fulfilling its educational mission, the family contributes to the common good and constitutes the first school of social virtues, which all societies need. The family helps people develop their freedom and responsibility, essential premises to assume any task in society. Furthermore, with education some fundamental values ​​are communicated, which must be assimilated by each person, necessary to be free, honest and responsible citizens.

239
239. The family has an original and irreplaceable function in the education of children. The love of parents, which is at the service of their children to help them extract from them ( [+[0]+] ) the best in themselves, finds its full realization precisely in the educational task: "The love of parents is transformed from source to soul and, consequently, into a norm that inspires and guides all concrete educational action, enriching it with the values ​​of sweetness, perseverance, goodness, service, selflessness, spirit of sacrifice, which are the most precious fruit of love."

240
240. Parents are the first, but not the only, educators of their children. It is up to them, therefore, to carry out educational work with a sense of responsibility in close and vigilant collaboration with civil and ecclesial organizations: «The same community, civil and ecclesial, dimension of man demands and leads to a broader and more articulated action, the result of the ordered collaboration of the various educational forces. These are necessary, although each one can and must intervene with their own competence and contribution. Parents have the right to choose educational instruments in accordance with their own convictions and to seek the means that can best help them in their educational mission, including in the spiritual and religious sphere. Public authorities have the obligation to guarantee this right and to ensure the specific conditions that allow its exercise. In this context, the issue of collaboration between family and school institution is situated.

241
241. Parents have the right to found and sustain educational institutions. For their part, public authorities must ensure that "state subsidies are distributed in such a way that parents are truly free to exercise their right, without having to bear unfair burdens." Parents should not bear, directly or indirectly, those additional burdens that prevent or unfairly limit the exercise of this freedom. The rejection of public financial support to non-state schools that need it and offer a service to civil society must be considered an injustice: "When the State claims a school monopoly, it goes beyond its rights and violates justice... The State cannot, without committing injustice, limit itself to tolerating so-called private schools. These present a public service and therefore have the right to be financially assisted.

242
242. The family has the responsibility of offering a comprehensive education. In fact, true education "proposes the formation of the human person in order to his ultimate goal and the good of societies, of which man is a member and in whose responsibilities he will participate when he becomes an adult." This integrity is assured when – with the testimony of life and with the word – children are educated to dialogue, encounter, sociability, legality, solidarity and peace, through the cultivation of the fundamental virtues of justice and charity.

243
243. Parents have a particular responsibility in the area of sexual education. It is of fundamental importance, for harmonious growth, that children learn in an orderly and progressive way the meaning of sexuality and learn to appreciate the human and moral values ​​associated with it: "Due to the close links between the sexual dimension of the person and their ethical values, this education must lead children to know and appreciate moral norms as a necessary and precious guarantee for personal and responsible growth in human sexuality." Parents have the obligation to verify the methods in which sexual education is taught in educational institutions, in order to ensure that such an important and delicate topic is treated appropriately.

244
244. The social doctrine of the Church constantly indicates the requirement to respect the dignity of children. «In the family, a community of people, very special attention must be reserved for the child, developing a deep esteem for their personal dignity, as well as great respect and generous service for their rights. This applies to all children, but it takes on a special urgency when the child is small and needs everything, is sick, delicate or handicapped.

245
245. The situation of a large part of the world's children is far from satisfactory, due to the lack of conditions that favor their integral development, despite the existence of a specific international legal instrument to protect the rights of the child, ratified by almost all members of the international community. These are conditions linked to the lack of health services, adequate nutrition, the possibility of receiving a minimum of school training and a home. Furthermore, some very serious problems remain unresolved: child trafficking, child labor, the phenomenon of "street children", the use of children in armed conflicts, the marriage of girls, the use of children for the trade of pornographic material, even through the most modern and sophisticated instruments of social communication. It is essential to combat, at the national and international level, violations of the dignity of boys and girls caused by sexual exploitation, by people dedicated to pedophilia and by violence of all kinds inflicted on these human beings, the most defenseless. These are criminal acts that must be effectively combated with appropriate preventive and criminal measures, through firm action by the various authorities.

246
246. The social subjectivity of families, both individually and in association, is also expressed with manifestations of solidarity and mutual help, not only between the families themselves, but also through various forms of participation in social and political life. It is the consequence of the family reality founded on love: born from love and growing in it, solidarity belongs to the family as a constitutive and structural element.

247
247. Families, far from being only the object of political action, can and should be the subject of this activity, mobilizing to "ensure that the laws and institutions of the State not only do not offend, but positively support and defend the rights and duties of the family." In this sense, families must grow in awareness of being “protagonists” of the so-called “family policy” and assume the responsibility of transforming society. To this end, family associations must be reinforced: «Families have the right to form associations with other families and institutions, in order to fulfill the family task in an appropriate and effective manner, as well as defend rights, promote good and represent the interests of the family. In the economic, social, legal and cultural order, families and family associations must see their own role recognized in the planning and development of programs that affect family life.

248
248. The relationship between the family and economic life is particularly significant. On the one hand, in effect, the "economy" was born from domestic work: the house has long been, and still—in many places—continues to be, a unit of production and center of life. The dynamism of economic life, on the other hand, develops from the initiative of people and is carried out, as concentric circles, in increasingly broader networks of production and exchange of goods and services, which increasingly involve families. The family, therefore, must be considered an essential protagonist of economic life, oriented not by the logic of the market, but according to the logic of sharing and solidarity between generations.

249
249. A very particular relationship unites the family with work: "The family constitutes one of the most important points of reference, according to which the socio-ethical order of human work must be formed." This relationship has its roots in the connection that exists between the person and their right to possess the fruit of their work and concerns not only the person as an individual, but also as a member of a family, understood as a "domestic society."

250
250. To protect this relationship between family and work, an important element that must be appreciated and safeguarded is the family salary, that is, a sufficient salary that allows the family to maintain and live with dignity. This salary must allow a certain savings that favors the acquisition of some form of property, as a guarantee of freedom. The right to property is closely linked to the existence of the family, which protects itself from needs thanks also to savings and the creation of family property. There can be various ways to implement the family salary. Some important social measures contribute to determining this, such as family allowances and other benefits for dependents, as well as remuneration for work in the home of one of the parents.

251
251. In the relationship between family and work, special attention is reserved for women's work in the family, or family care work, which also implies the man's responsibilities as husband and father. Family care tasks, starting with those of the mother, precisely because they are oriented and dedicated to the service of the quality of life, constitute an eminently personal and personalizing type of work activity, which must be socially recognized and valued, even through economic remuneration at least similar to that of other tasks. At the same time, it is necessary to eliminate all obstacles that prevent husbands from freely exercising their procreative responsibility and, especially, those that prevent women from fully developing their maternal functions.

252
252. The starting point for a correct and constructive relationship between the family and society is the recognition of the subjectivity and social priority of the family. This intimate relationship between the two "also requires that society not fail to fulfill its fundamental duty to respect and promote the family itself." Society and, especially, state institutions,—respecting the priority and “preeminence” of the family—are called to guarantee and promote the genuine identity of family life and to avoid and combat everything that alters and damages it. This requires that political and legislative action safeguard family values, from the promotion of intimacy and family coexistence, to respect for nascent life and effective freedom of choice in the education of children. Society and the State cannot, therefore, neither absorb nor replace nor reduce the social dimension of the family; rather, they must honor, recognize, respect and promote it according to the principle of subsidiarity.

253
253. Society's service to the family takes the form of recognition, respect and promotion of family rights. All of this requires the implementation of authentic and effective family policies, with precise interventions, capable of addressing the needs that derive from the rights of the family as such. In this sense, it is necessary as a prerequisite, essential and inalienable, to recognize – which entails the protection, appreciation and promotion – of the identity of the family, a natural society founded on marriage. This recognition establishes a clear line of demarcation between the family, correctly understood, and other forms of coexistence, which—by their nature—cannot deserve either the name or the condition of family.

254
254. The recognition, by civil institutions and the State, of the priority of the family over any other community and over the state reality itself, involves overcoming merely individualistic conceptions and assuming the family dimension as a cultural and political perspective, essential in the consideration of people. This is not placed as an alternative to the rights that people have individually, but rather as their support and protection. This perspective makes it possible to develop normative criteria for a correct solution to various social problems, because people should not be considered only individually, but also in relation to their own family units, whose specific values ​​and demands must be taken into account.

255
255. The Old Testament presents God as omnipotent Creator ([+[0]+]), who shapes man in his image and invites him to work the earth ([+[1]+]), and to guard the garden of Eden where he has placed it ([+[2]+]). God entrusts the first human couple with the task of subduing the earth and dominating every living being ( [+[3]+] ). Man's dominion over other living beings, however, should not be despotic and irrational; On the contrary, he must "cultivate and guard" ( [+[4]+] ) the goods created by God: goods that man has not created but has received as a precious gift, entrusted to his responsibility by the Creator. Cultivating the land means not abandoning it to itself; To dominate it is to take care of it, just as a wise king takes care of his people and a shepherd of his flock.

256
256. Work belongs to the original condition of man and precedes his fall; It is, therefore, neither a punishment nor a curse. It becomes fatigue and sorrow because of the sin of Adam and Eve, which breaks their trusting and harmonious relationship with God ( [+[0]+] ). The prohibition of eating "from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil" ([+[1]+]) reminds man that he has received everything as a gift and that he remains a creature and not the Creator. The sin of Adam and Eve was caused precisely by this temptation: "you will be like gods" ([+[2]+]). They wanted to have absolute dominion over all things, without submitting to the will of the Creator. Since then, the soil has become greedy, ungrateful, deafly hostile ( [+[3]+] ); Only with the sweat of the brow will it be possible to obtain food ( [+[4]+] ). However, despite the sin of the first parents, the plan of the Creator, the meaning of his creatures and, among these, of man, called to be the cultivator and custodian of creation, remain unchanged.

257
257. Work must be honored because it is a source of wealth or, at least, conditions for a decent life, and, in general, an effective instrument against poverty ( [+[0]+] ). But one should not give in to the temptation to idolize him, because in him the ultimate and definitive meaning of life cannot be found. Work is essential, but it is God, not work, that is the source of life and the end of man. The fundamental principle of wisdom is the fear of the Lord; the demand for justice, which derives from it, precedes that of benefit: "Better is a little with fear of Yahweh, than great treasure with anxiety" ([+[1]+]); "Better a little, with justice, than a lot of income without equity" ([+[2]+]).

258
258. The culmination of biblical teaching on work is the commandment of Sabbath rest. Rest opens to man, subject to the necessity of work, the perspective of a fuller freedom, that of the eternal Sabbath ( [+[0]+] ). Rest allows men to remember and relive the works of God, from Creation to Redemption, to recognize themselves as His work ( [+[1]+] ), and to give thanks for their life and subsistence to Him, who is their Author.

259
259. In his preaching, Jesus teaches to appreciate work. He himself "became like us in everything, he dedicated most of the years of his earthly life to manual work at the carpenter's bench", in Joseph's workshop ([+[0]+]), to which he was subjected ([+[1]+]). Jesus condemns the behavior of the lazy servant, who hides talent underground ( [+[2]+] ) and praises the faithful and prudent servant whom the master finds carrying out the tasks entrusted to him ( [+[3]+] ). He describes his very mission as working: "My Father always works, and I work too" ([+[4]+]); and his disciples as workers in the harvest of the Lord, who represents humanity to evangelize ( [+[5]+] ). For these workers the general principle applies according to which "the worker has the right to his salary" ([+[6]+]); They are authorized to stay in the houses where they receive them, to eat and drink what they are offered ( [+[7]+] ).

260
260. In his preaching, Jesus teaches men not to let themselves be dominated by work. They must, above all, worry about their soul; winning the whole world is not the goal of his life ( [+[0]+] ). The treasures of earth are consumed, while those of heaven are imperishable: to these man must attach his heart ( [+[1]+] ). Work should not worry ( [+[2]+] ): the man worried and agitated by many things runs the risk of neglecting the Kingdom of God and his justice ( [+[3]+] ), of which he truly needs; Everything else, including work, finds its place, its meaning and its value, only if it is oriented towards the only necessary thing, which will never be taken away from it ( [+[4]+] ).

261
261. During his earthly ministry, Jesus works tirelessly, carrying out powerful works to free man from illness, suffering and death. The Sabbath, which the Old Testament had established as a day of liberation and which, observed only formally, had been emptied of its authentic meaning, is reaffirmed by Jesus in its original value: «The Sabbath has been instituted for man and not man for the Sabbath! » ( [+[0]+] ). With the healings, carried out on this day of rest ( [+[1]+] ), Jesus wants to demonstrate that he is Lord of the Sabbath, because He is truly the Son of God, and that it is the day on which man must dedicate himself to God and others. Liberating from evil, practicing brotherhood and sharing, means giving work its noblest meaning, that is, what allows humanity to move towards the eternal Sabbath, in which rest is transformed into the celebration to which man aspires internally. Precisely, to the extent that it orients humanity to the experience of God's Sabbath and his life of communion, work inaugurates the new creation on earth.

262
262. The human activity of enriching and transforming the universe can and must manifest the perfections hidden in it, which have their principle and model in the uncreated Word. The Pauline and Johannine writings highlight the Trinitarian dimension of creation and, in particular, the union between the Son-Word, the "Logos", and creation ([+[0]+]). Created in Him and through Him, redeemed by Him, the universe is not a casual mass, but a "cosmos", whose order man must discover, support and bring to fulfillment. "In Jesus Christ, the visible world, created by God for man—the world that, sin entering, is subject to vanity ([+[1]+])—acquires again the original link with the same divine source of Wisdom and Love." In this way, that is, by clarifying in an ascending progression, "the inscrutable riches of Christ" ([+[2]+]) in creation, human work is transformed into a service to the greatness of God.

263
263. Work represents a fundamental dimension of human existence not only as participation in the work of creation, but also of redemption. He who endures the painful fatigue of work in union with Jesus cooperates, in a certain sense, with the Son of God in his redemptive work and shows himself as a disciple of Christ carrying the Cross every day, in the activity that he is called to fulfill. From this perspective, work can be considered a means of sanctification and an animation of earthly realities in the Spirit of Christ. The work, thus presented, is an expression of the full humanity of man, in his historical condition and in his eschatological orientation: his free and responsible action shows his intimate relationship with the Creator and his creative potential, while he fights day by day the deformation of sin, also by earning his bread with the sweat of his brow.

264
264. The awareness of the transience of the "scene of this world" ([+[0]+]) does not exempt us from any historical task, much less from work ([+[1]+]), which is an integral part of the human condition, without being the only reason for life. No Christian, by virtue of belonging to a supportive and fraternal community, should feel entitled not to work and live at the expense of others ( [+[2]+] ). On the contrary, the apostle Paul exhorts everyone to aspire to "live in tranquility" with the work of one's own hands, so that "you do not need anyone" ([+[3]+]), and to practice solidarity, even material, that shares the fruits of work with those who "are in need" ([+[4]+]). Santiago defends the violated rights of workers: «Look; The salary that you have not paid to the workers who mowed your fields is screaming; and the cries of the reapers have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts » ( [+[5]+] ). Believers must live work in the style of Christ, turning it into an occasion to give a Christian testimony "before outsiders" ([+[6]+]).

265
265. The Fathers of the Church never consider work as "opus servile", - as it was considered, on the other hand, in the culture of their time - but always as "opus humanum", and they try to honor it in all its expressions. Through work, man governs the world by collaborating with God; Next to Him, he is Lord and performs good works for himself and for others. Leisure harms man's being, while activity is beneficial for his body and spirit. The Christian is obliged to work not only to earn his bread, but also to care for his poorest neighbor, whom the Lord commands to feed, drink, clothe, welcome, care for and accompany him ([+[0]+]). Each worker, Saint Ambrose affirms, is the hand of Christ that continues to create and do good.

266
266. With work and diligence, man, a participant in art and divine wisdom, beautifies creation, the cosmos already ordered by the Father; It raises social and community energies that feed the common good, especially for the benefit of those most in need. Human work, oriented toward charity, becomes a means of contemplation, transformed into devout prayer, into vigilant asceticism, and into yearning hope for the day that has no end. «In this higher vision, work, punishment and at the same time reward of human activity, entails another relationship, essentially religious, which has happily expressed the Benedictine formula: Pray et labora! The religious fact gives human work an animating and redemptive spirituality. This kinship between work and religion reflects the mysterious, but real, alliance that mediates between human action and the providential action of God.

267
267. The course of history is marked by the profound transformations and great achievements of work, but also by the exploitation of so many workers and the offenses to their dignity. The industrial revolution posed a great challenge to the Church, to which the social Magisterium responded with prophetic force, affirming principles of universal validity and perennial relevance, for the good of working men and their rights.

268
268. "Rerum novarum" is, above all, a passionate defense of the inalienable dignity of workers, to which is added the importance of the right to property, the principle of collaboration between classes, the rights of the weak and the poor, the obligations of workers and employers, and the right of association.

269
269. Since "Rerum Novarum", the Church has not stopped considering the problems of work as part of a social question that has progressively acquired global dimensions. The encyclical "Laborem exercens" enriches the personalistic vision of work, characteristic of previous social documents, indicating the need to delve into the meanings and commitments that work entails, highlighting the fact that "new questions and problems always arise, new hopes are always born, but fears and threats are also born related to this fundamental dimension of human existence, of which man's life is made every day, from which one derives his own specific dignity and in which, at the same time, it is contained." "the incessant measure of human fatigue, suffering, and also the damage and injustice that deeply invade social life, within each Nation and on an international scale." In fact, work, the "essential key" to the entire social issue, conditions not only the economic, but also the cultural and moral development of individuals, the family, society and the entire human race.

270
270. Human work has a double dimension: objective and subjective. In an objective sense, it is the set of activities, resources, instruments and techniques that man uses to produce, to dominate the earth, according to the words of the book of Genesis. Work in the subjective sense is the action of man as a dynamic being, capable of carrying out various actions that belong to the work process and that correspond to his personal vocation: «Man must subdue the earth, he must dominate it, because, as the “image of God”, he is a person, that is, a subjective being capable of acting in a programmed and rational manner, capable of deciding about himself and tending to realize himself. As a person, man is, therefore, the subject of work.

271
271. Subjectivity gives work its peculiar dignity, which prevents it from being considered a simple commodity or an impersonal element of the productive organization. Work, regardless of its greater or lesser objective value, is an essential expression of the person, it is "actus personae." Any form of materialism and economism that attempts to reduce the worker to a mere instrument of production, to simple labor-power, to exclusively material value, would end up irremediably denaturalizing the essence of work, depriving it of its most noble and deeply human purpose. The person is the measure of the dignity of work: "Indeed, there is no doubt that human work has an ethical value, which is completely and directly linked to the fact that the person who carries it out is a person."

272
272. Human work not only comes from the person, but is also essentially ordered and finalized to him. Regardless of its objective content, work must be oriented towards the subject who performs it, because the purpose of work, of any work, is always man. Even though the importance of the objective component of work cannot be ignored from the point of view of its quality, this component, however, is subordinated to the achievement of man, and therefore to the subjective dimension, thanks to which it is possible to affirm that work is for man and not man for work and that "the purpose of work, of any work done by man - even if it were the "most common" work, the most monotonous on the scale of the common way of valuing, and even the one that most marginalizes - remains always being the man himself.

273
273. Human work also has an intrinsic social dimension. A man's work, in fact, is naturally linked to that of other men: "Today, mainly, working is working with others and working for others: it is doing something for someone." The fruits of work are also an opportunity for exchange, relationships and encounters. Work, therefore, cannot be valued fairly if its social nature is not taken into account, "since, if there is no true social and organic body, if there is no social and legal order that guarantees the exercise of work, if the different trades, dependent on each other, do not collaborate and complete each other and, what is even more, intelligence, capital and work do not associate and merge as a unit, human efficiency will not be able to produce its fruits. Therefore, work cannot be valued fairly or remunerated with equity if its social and individual character is not taken into account.

274
274. Work is also "an obligation, that is, a duty." Man must work, either because the Creator has ordered him to do so, or because he must respond to the demands of maintenance and development of his own humanity. Work is outlined as a moral obligation with respect to others, which is first of all one's own family, but also the society to which one belongs; the Nation of which one is the son or daughter; and the entire human family of which we are a member: we are heirs of the work of generations and, at the same time, architects of the future of all the men who will live after us.

275
275. Work confirms the profound identity of man created in the image and likeness of God: «Becoming – through his work – more and more master of the earth and still confirming – through work – his dominion over the visible world, man, in each case and in each phase of this process, places himself in line with the original plan of the Creator; which is necessarily and indissolubly linked to the fact that man has been created, male and female, “in the image of God.” This qualifies man's activity in the universe: he is not the owner, but the custodian, called to reflect in his own work the imprint of Him whose image he is.

276
276. Work, due to its subjective or personal nature, is superior to any other factor of production. This principle applies, in particular, with respect to capital. Currently, the term "capital" has various meanings: on certain occasions it indicates the material means of production of a company; In others, the financial resources invested in a productive initiative or also in stock market operations. There is also talk, in a not entirely appropriate way, of "human capital", to mean human resources, that is, the people themselves, insofar as they are capable of work effort, knowledge, creativity, intuition of the demands of their peers, in reciprocal agreement as members of an organization. Reference is made to "social capital" when it is intended to indicate the capacity for collaboration of a community, the result of investment in bonds of reciprocal trust. This multiplicity of meanings offers further reasons to reflect on what the relationship between work and capital may mean today.

277
277. Social doctrine has addressed the relationships between work and capital, highlighting the priority of the former over the latter, as well as their complementarity.

278
278. When reflecting on the relationships between work and capital, especially in the face of the imposing transformations of our time, it must be considered that "the main resource" and the "decisive factor" available to man is man himself and that "the integral development of the human person at work does not contradict, but rather favors, the greater productivity and effectiveness of work itself." The world of work, in fact, is increasingly discovering that the value of "human capital" lies in the knowledge of workers, in their willingness to establish relationships, in creativity, in their entrepreneurial character, in the ability to consciously face the new, to work together and to know how to pursue common objectives. These are genuinely personal qualities, which belong to the subject of the work rather than to the objective, technical or operational aspects of the work itself. All this entails a change of perspective in the relations between work and capital: it can be stated that, unlike what happened in the old organization of work, where the subject ended up being equated with the object, the machine, today, however, the subjective dimension of work tends to be more decisive and important than the objective one.

279
279. The relationship between labor and capital often presents the features of conflict, which takes on new characteristics with changes in the social and economic context. Yesterday, the conflict between capital and labor arose, above all, "from the fact that the workers, offering their forces for work, put them at the disposal of the group of employers, and that this group, guided by the principle of maximum performance, tried to establish the lowest possible salary for the work performed by the workers." Currently, the conflict presents new and, perhaps, more worrying aspects: scientific and technological progress and the globalization of markets, in themselves a source of development and progress, expose workers to the risk of being exploited by the wheels of the economy and by the unbridled search for productivity.

280
280. It should not be mistakenly thought that the process of overcoming the dependence of work on matter is capable of overcoming alienation in and of work. This happens not only in the numerous existing areas where unemployment, informal work, child labor, low-paid work, or exploitation at work abound; It also presents itself with new, much more subtle forms of exploitation in new jobs: super-work; the work-career that sometimes steals space from equally human and necessary dimensions for the person; the excessive flexibility of work that makes family life precarious and sometimes impossible; the segmentation of work, which risks having serious consequences for the unitary perception of one's own existence and for the stability of family relationships. If man is alienated when he inverts the relationship between means and ends, also in the new context of immaterial, light, qualitative rather than quantitative work, elements of alienation may occur, "depending on whether his [man's] participation in an authentic community of solidarity increases, or his isolation in a complex of relations of exacerbated competition and reciprocal exclusion."

281
281. The relationship between work and capital is also realized through the participation of workers in property, its management and its fruits. This is a frequently forgotten requirement, which therefore needs to be better valued: efforts must be made that “every person, based on their own work, has full right to consider themselves, at the same time, “co-owner” of that kind of great work workshop in which they are committed to everyone. One way to achieve this goal could be to associate, as far as possible, work with the ownership of capital and give life to a rich range of intermediate bodies with economic, social, and cultural purposes: bodies that enjoy effective autonomy with respect to public powers, that pursue their specific objectives maintaining relationships of loyal and mutual collaboration, with subordination to the demands of the common good, and that offer the form and nature of living communities, that is, that the respective members are considered and treated as people and are encouraged. to take an active part in the life of these communities. The new organization of work, in which knowledge counts more than the sole ownership of the means of production, concretely confirms that work, due to its subjective nature, is a title of participation: it is essential to firmly accept this reality to assess the fair position of work in the productive process and to find modalities of participation in accordance with the subjectivity of work in the peculiarity of the various concrete situations.

282
282. The social Magisterium of the Church structures the relationship between work and capital also with respect to the institution of private property, the right and use of it. The right to private property is subordinated to the principle of the universal destination of goods and should not constitute a reason for impediment to the work and development of others. Property, which is acquired primarily through work, must serve work. This applies particularly to the ownership of the means of production; but the principle also concerns the assets of the financial, technical, intellectual and personal world.

283
283. Private and public property, as well as the various mechanisms of the economic system, must be predisposed to guarantee an economy at the service of man, so that they contribute to putting into practice the principle of the universal destination of goods. In this perspective, the question relating to the ownership and use of new technologies and knowledge acquires great importance, which constitute, in our time, a particular form of property, no less important than the ownership of land and capital. These resources, like all other goods, have a universal destination; Therefore, they must also be inserted in a context of legal norms and social rules that guarantee their use inspired by criteria of justice, equity and respect for human rights. New knowledge and technologies, thanks to their enormous potential, can contribute decisively to the promotion of social progress, but they can become a factor in unemployment and a widening of the distance between developed and underdeveloped areas, if they remain concentrated in the richest countries or in the hands of reduced power groups.

284
284. Holiday rest is a right. «On the seventh day God ceased from all the work he had done» ([+[0]+]): men, created in his image, must also enjoy rest and free time to be able to attend to family, cultural, social and religious life. The institution of the Lord's Day contributes to this. Believers, during Sunday and other holy days of obligation, must abstain from "work or activities that impede the worship due to God, the joy proper to the Lord's Day, the practice of works of mercy and the necessary rest of the spirit and body." Family needs or requirements of social utility may legitimately exempt from Sunday rest, but they should not create customs that are harmful to religion, family life and health.

285
285. Sunday is a day that must be sanctified through effective charity, paying special attention to family and relatives, as well as to the sick and the elderly. Nor should we forget the "brothers who have the same needs and the same rights and cannot rest because of poverty and misery." It is also a favorable time for reflection, silence and study, which favor the growth of the interior and Christian life. Believers should distinguish themselves, also on this day, by their moderation, avoiding all the excesses and violence that frequently characterize mass entertainment. The day of the Lord must always be lived as the day of liberation, which leads to participation in "the solemn gathering and assembly of the firstborn written in heaven" ([+[0]+]) and anticipates the celebration of the definitive Passover in the glory of heaven.

286
286. Public authorities have the duty to ensure that citizens are not deprived, for reasons of economic productivity, of time dedicated to rest and divine worship. Employers have a similar obligation with respect to their employees. Christians must strive, respecting religious freedom and the common good of all, to ensure that the laws recognize Sunday and other liturgical solemnities as holidays: "They must give everyone a public example of prayer, respect and joy, and defend their traditions as a precious contribution to the spiritual life of human society." Every Christian must "avoid unnecessarily imposing on another what would prevent him from keeping the Lord's Day."

287
287. Work is a fundamental right and a good for man: a useful good, worthy of him, because it is suitable for expressing and increasing human dignity. The Church teaches the value of work not only because it is always personal, but also because of its necessity. Work is necessary to form and maintain a family, acquire the right to property, and contribute to the common good of the human family. The consideration of the moral implications that the question of work carries in social life leads the Church to indicate unemployment as a "true social calamity", especially in relation to the young generations.

288
288. Work is a good for all, which must be available to all those capable of it. "Full employment" is, therefore, a mandatory objective for any economic system oriented towards justice and the common good. A society where the right to work is annulled or systematically denied and where economic policy measures do not allow workers to reach satisfactory levels of employment, "cannot achieve its ethical legitimation or just social peace." An important function and, therefore, a specific and serious responsibility, is played in this area by "indirect entrepreneurs", that is, those subjects - people or institutions of various types - who are capable of guiding, at a national or international level, labor and economic policy.

289
289. The driving capacity of a society oriented towards the common good and projected towards the future is also measured, and above all, by the job prospects it can offer. The high unemployment rate, the presence of obsolete education systems and the persistence of difficulties in accessing training and the job market constitute for many, especially young people, a serious obstacle on the path of human and professional fulfillment. Those who are unemployed or underemployed suffer, in fact, the profoundly negative consequences that this condition produces on their personality and run the risk of being left on the margins of society and becoming a victim of social exclusion. In addition to young people, this drama generally affects women, less specialized workers, the handicapped, immigrants, ex-prisoners, the illiterate, all people who encounter greater difficulties in seeking a position in the world of work.

290
290. Job retention increasingly depends on professional skills. The instruction and education system must not neglect the human and technical training necessary to successfully carry out the required tasks. The increasingly widespread need to change jobs several times throughout life requires the educational system to favor people's availability for permanent updating and repeated qualifications. Young people must learn to act autonomously, to become capable of responsibly assuming the task of facing with adequate competence the risks linked to a changing economic context and often unpredictable in its evolution scenarios. It is equally essential to offer timely training opportunities to adults seeking a new qualification, as well as to the unemployed. In general, people's working lives must find new and concrete forms of support, starting precisely with the training system, so that it is less difficult to go through stages of change, uncertainty and precariousness.

291
291. The problems of occupation demand the responsibilities of the State, which has the duty to promote policies that activate employment, that is, that favor the creation of job opportunities in the national territory, encouraging the productive world to do so. The duty of the State does not consist so much in directly ensuring the right to work of all citizens, constraining all economic life and suffocating the free initiative of people, but above all in "supporting the activity of companies, creating conditions that ensure job opportunities, stimulating it where it is insufficient or sustaining it in times of crisis."

292
292. Taking into account the planetary dimensions that economic-financial relations and the labor market have rapidly assumed, effective international collaboration between States must be promoted, through treaties, agreements and common action plans that safeguard the right to work, even in the most critical phases of the economic cycle, at the national and international level. We must be aware that human work is a right on which the promotion of social justice and civil peace directly depends. Important tasks in this direction correspond to International Organizations, as well as to trade unions: uniting in the most appropriate ways, they must strive, above all, to establish "an increasingly compact network of legal provisions that protect the work of men, women, and young people, and ensure them adequate remuneration."

293
293. For the promotion of the right to work it is important, today as in times of "Rerum novarum", that there really be a "free process of self-organization of society." Significant testimonies and examples of self-organization can be found in the numerous initiatives, private and social, characterized by forms of participation, cooperation and self-management, which reveal the fusion of solidarity energies. These initiatives are offered to the market as a varied sector of work activities that are distinguished by particular attention to the relational aspect of the goods produced and the services provided in various areas: education, health care, basic social services, culture. The initiatives of the so-called "third sector" constitute an increasingly relevant opportunity for the development of work and the economy.

294
294. Work is "the foundation on which family life is formed, which is a natural right and a vocation of man." Work ensures the means of subsistence and guarantees the educational process of children. Family and work, so closely interdependent in the experience of the vast majority of people, require a consideration that is more in line with reality, an attention that encompasses them together, without the limitations of a private conception of the family and an economic conception of work. To achieve this, it is necessary that companies, professional organizations, unions and the State become promoters of labor policies that do not harm, but rather favor, the family nucleus from an occupational point of view. Family life and work, in fact, condition each other in various ways. Long daily commutes to and from work, double work, physical and psychological fatigue limit the time dedicated to family life; Unemployment situations have material and spiritual repercussions on families, just as family tensions and crises negatively influence attitudes and performance in the workplace.

295
295. The feminine genius is necessary in all expressions of social life; For this reason, the presence of women must also be guaranteed in the workplace. The first and indispensable step in this direction is the concrete possibility of access to vocational training. The recognition and protection of women's rights in this area depend, in general, on the organization of work, which must take into account the dignity and vocation of women, whose "true promotion... requires that work be structured in such a way that it does not have to pay for its promotion with the abandonment of its own specific character and to the detriment of the family, in which as a mother it has an irreplaceable role." It is a question with which the quality of society and the effective protection of women's right to work are measured.

296
296. Child and minor labor, in its intolerable forms, constitutes a less visible type of violence, but no less terrible. A violence that, beyond all the political, economic and legal implications, remains essentially a moral problem. Leo Since precocious activity withers, like tender grasses, the forces that spring from childhood, with which the constitution of childhood would be completely destroyed. The plague of child labor, more than a hundred years away, has still not been eliminated.

297
297. Immigration can be a resource rather than an obstacle to development. In today's world, in which the imbalance between rich and poor countries is worsening and the development of communications is rapidly reducing distances, the emigration of people in search of better living conditions, coming from the least favored areas of the earth, is growing; Its arrival in developed countries is often perceived as a threat to the high levels of well-being achieved thanks to decades of economic growth. Immigrants, however, in most cases, respond to a requirement in the sphere of work that would otherwise remain unsatisfied, in sectors and territories in which the local workforce is insufficient or is not willing to make its labor contribution.

298
298. The institutions of the countries that receive immigrants must carefully monitor so that the temptation to exploit foreign workers does not spread, depriving them of the rights guaranteed to national workers, which must be assured to all without discrimination. The regulation of migratory flows according to criteria of equity and balance is one of the essential conditions to ensure that integration is carried out with the guarantees required by the dignity of the human person. Immigrants must be welcomed as people and helped, along with their families, to integrate into social life. In this sense, the right to family reunion must be respected and promoted. At the same time, to the extent possible, all those conditions that allow greater job opportunities in their places of origin must be favored.

299
299. Agricultural work deserves special attention, due to the social, cultural and economic function it plays in the economic systems of many countries, the numerous problems it must face in the context of an increasingly globalized economy, and its growing importance in safeguarding the natural environment: "Consequently, in many situations radical and urgent changes are necessary to once again give agriculture—and rural people—their fair value as the basis of a healthy economy, in the overall development of the social community."

300
300. In some countries, a redistribution of land is essential, within the framework of effective agrarian reform policies, in order to eliminate the impediment posed by unproductive latifundia, condemned by the social doctrine of the Church, to achieve authentic economic development: "Developing countries can effectively counteract the current process of concentration of land ownership if they confront some situations that present themselves as authentic structural nodes. These are: the shortcomings and delays at the legislative level on the issue of recognition of land ownership title and on the credit market; the lack of interest in agricultural research and training; "the neglect of social services and the creation of infrastructure in rural areas." Agrarian reform is, therefore, in addition to a political necessity, a moral obligation, since failure to carry it out constitutes, in these countries, an obstacle to the beneficial effects that derive from the opening of markets and, in general, from the advantageous opportunities for growth that current globalization can offer.

301
301. Workers' rights, like all other rights, are based on the nature of the human person and their transcendent dignity. The social Magisterium of the Church has considered it appropriate to state some of them, indicating the convenience of their recognition in legal systems: the right to fair remuneration; the right to rest; the right "to work environments and productive processes that do not harm the physical health of workers and do not harm their moral integrity"; the right to have one's personality safeguarded in the workplace, without "in any way violating one's conscience or one's dignity"; the right to adequate and essential subsidies for the subsistence of unemployed workers and their families; the right to a pension, as well as social security for old age, illness and in case of accidents related to work benefits; the right to social provisions linked to maternity; the right to assemble and associate. These rights are frequently neglected, as confirmed by the sad phenomena of underpaid work, without adequate guarantees or representation. It often happens that working conditions for men, women and children, especially in developing countries, are so inhumane that they offend their dignity and damage their health.

302
302. Remuneration is the most important instrument for practicing justice in labor relations. The "fair wage is the legitimate fruit of work"; Whoever denies it or does not give it in due time and in fair proportion to the work done commits a serious injustice ( [+[0]+] ). The salary is the instrument that allows the worker to access the goods of the earth: "Remuneration for work must be such that it allows a man and his family a dignified life on a material, social, cultural and spiritual level, taking into account the job and productivity of each person, as well as the conditions of the company and the common good." The simple agreement between the worker and the employer regarding remuneration is not enough to qualify the agreed remuneration as "fair", because it "must not be in any way insufficient" for the worker's livelihood: natural justice is prior and superior to the freedom of contract.

303
303. The economic well-being of a country is not measured exclusively by the quantity of goods produced, but also taking into account the way in which they are produced and the degree of equity in the distribution of income, which should allow everyone to have what is necessary for the development and improvement of their own person. A fair distribution of income must be established not only on the basis of the criteria of commutative justice, but also of social justice, that is, considering, in addition to the objective value of labor benefits, the human dignity of the subjects who perform them. Authentic economic well-being is also achieved through appropriate social policies for the redistribution of income that, taking into account general conditions, appropriately consider the merits and needs of all citizens.

304
304. Social doctrine recognizes the legitimacy of the strike "when it constitutes an inevitable resource, if not necessary to obtain a proportionate benefit", after having confirmed the ineffectiveness of all other modalities to overcome conflicts. The strike, one of the most costly achievements of the union movement, can be defined as the collective and concerted refusal, by the workers, to continue developing their activities, in order to obtain, through the pressure thus exerted on the bosses, on the State and on public opinion, improvements in their working conditions and social situation. Also the strike, even when it appears "as a kind of ultimatum", must always be a peaceful method of demanding and fighting for one's own rights; It is "morally unacceptable when it is accompanied by violence or also when it is carried out based on objectives not directly linked to work conditions or contrary to the common good."

305
305. The Magisterium recognizes the fundamental function carried out by workers' unions, whose raison d'être consists of the right of workers to form associations or unions to defend the vital interests of men employed in the various professions. The unions "have developed on the basis of the struggle of workers, of the world of work and, above all, of industrial workers for the protection of their just rights against employers and owners of the means of production." Trade union organizations, seeking their specific purpose at the service of the common good, are a constructive factor of social order and solidarity and, therefore, an indispensable element of social life. The recognition of labor rights has always been a problem that is difficult to solve, because it is carried out within the framework of complex historical and institutional processes, and even today it cannot be said to have been achieved. Which makes the exercise of authentic solidarity among workers more current and necessary.

306
306. Social doctrine teaches that relationships in the world of work must be characterized by collaboration: hatred and the fight to eliminate others constitute absolutely unacceptable methods, because in every social system both work and capital are indispensable to the production process. In light of this conception, social doctrine "in no way considers that unions constitute only the reflection of the "class" structure of society nor that they are the exponent of the class struggle that inevitably governs social life." The unions are properly the promoters of the fight for social justice, for the rights of working men, in their specific professions: «This “fight” must be seen as a normal defense action “in favor” of just good; [...] it is not a fight “against” others. The union, being above all a means for solidarity and justice, cannot abuse the instruments of struggle; Due to their vocation, they must overcome the temptations of corporatism, know how to self-regulate and weigh the consequences of their options in relation to the common good.

307
307. The union, in addition to the function of defense and vindication, is responsible for representation, aimed at "the correct organization of economic life", and for educating the social conscience of workers, so that they feel an active part, according to the capabilities and aptitudes of each one, in the entire work of economic and social development, and in the construction of the universal common good. The union and other forms of workers' associations must assume a role of collaboration with the rest of the social entities and be interested in the management of public affairs. Trade union organizations have the duty to influence public power, in order to make it duly aware of labor problems and to commit it to favoring the realization of workers' rights. Unions, however, do not have the character of "political parties" that fight for power, and neither should they be subject to the decisions of political parties or have too close ties with them: "In such a situation they easily deviate from what is their specific task, which is to ensure the just rights of working men within the framework of the common good of the entire society, and become, instead, an instrument of pressure to achieve other goals."

308
308. The current socioeconomic context, characterized by increasingly rapid economic-financial globalization processes, requires the renewal of unions. Currently, unions are called to act in new ways, expanding their radius of solidarity action so that, in addition to traditional labor categories, workers with atypical or fixed-term contracts are protected; workers with a job in danger due to company mergers, which are increasingly frequent, even at an international level; the unemployed, immigrants, temporary workers; those who, due to lack of professional updating, have been expelled from the labor market and cannot return to it due to lack of adequate courses to qualify again.

309
309. In the search for "new forms of solidarity", workers' associations must orient themselves towards the assumption of greater responsibilities, not only with respect to traditional mechanisms of redistribution, but also in relation to the production of wealth and the creation of social, political and cultural conditions that allow all those who can and wish to work, to exercise their right to work, in full respect for their dignity as workers. The gradual overcoming of the organizational model based on salaried work in large companies also makes it timely—while saving fundamental labor rights—to update the norms and social security systems through which workers have been protected until today.

310
310. One of the most significant stimuli for the current change in the organization of work comes from the phenomenon of globalization, which allows experimenting with new forms of production, moving production plants to areas different from those in which strategic decisions are made and distant from consumer markets. There are two factors that drive this phenomenon: the extraordinary speed of communication without limits of space and time, and the relative ease of transporting goods and people from one part of the planet to another. This has a fundamental consequence on productive processes: property is increasingly distant, often indifferent to the social effects of the choices it makes. On the other hand, if it is true that globalization, a priori, is neither good nor bad in itself, but depends on the use that man makes of it, it must be affirmed that a globalization of protection, minimum essential rights and equity is necessary.

311
311. One of the most relevant characteristics of the new work organization is the physical fragmentation of the production cycle, driven by the desire to achieve greater efficiency and greater profits. From this point of view, the traditional space-time coordinates, within which the production cycle was defined, undergo an unprecedented transformation, which determines a change in the very structure of work. All of this has important consequences on the lives of people and communities, subject to radical changes both in the field of material conditions and in that of culture and values. This phenomenon affects, at a global and local level, millions of people, regardless of the profession they practice, their social status, or their cultural preparation. The reorganization of time, its regularization and the ongoing changes in the use of space – comparable, in their nature, to the first industrial revolution, in that they involve all productive sectors, on all continents, regardless of their degree of development – ​​must therefore be considered a decisive challenge, including ethical and cultural aspects, in the field of defining a renewed system of labor protection.

312
312. The globalization of the economy, with the liberalization of markets, the accentuation of competition, the growth of companies specialized in the supply of products and services, requires greater flexibility in the labor market and in the organization and management of production processes. When assessing this delicate matter, it seems appropriate to give greater moral, cultural and strategic attention to guide social and political action on the issues linked to the identity and content of the new job, in a market and an economy that are themselves new. Changes in the labor market are often an effect of change in the job itself, rather than its cause.

313
313. Work, especially in the economic systems of the most developed countries, is going through a phase that marks the transition from an industrial-type economy to an economy essentially focused on services and technological innovation. Services and activities characterized by a strong information content are growing faster than the traditional primary and secondary sectors, with far-reaching consequences on the organization of production and exchanges, on the content and form of labor benefits and on social protection systems.

314
314. The ongoing transition means the transition from a dependent job for an indefinite period of time, understood as a permanent position, to a job characterized by a plurality of work activities; from a compact, defined and recognized world of work, to a universe of jobs, varied, fluid, rich in promises, but also loaded with disturbing questions, especially in the face of the growing uncertainty of employment prospects, to persistent phenomena of structural unemployment, to the inadequacy of current social security systems. The demands of competition, technological innovation and the complexity of financial flows must be harmonized with the defense of workers and their rights.

315
315. Productive decentralization, which assigns multiple tasks to smaller companies, previously concentrated in large productive units, strengthens and gives new impetus to small and medium-sized companies. Thus, along with traditional artisanal activity, new companies emerge, characterized by small productive units that work in modern production sectors or in decentralized activities of larger companies. Many activities that yesterday required dependent work are today carried out in new ways, which favor independent work and are characterized by a greater component of risk and responsibility.

316
316. In developing countries, in recent years, the phenomenon of the expansion of "informal" or "underground" economic activities has spread, which represents a sign of promising economic growth, but raises ethical and legal problems. The significant increase in jobs generated by such activities is, in reality, due to the lack of specialization of a large part of local workers and the disorderly development of the formal economic sectors. A large number of people are thus forced to work in conditions of serious discomfort and in a framework lacking the necessary rules to protect the dignity of the worker. The levels of productivity, income and standard of living are extremely low and are often insufficient to guarantee that workers and their families reach a subsistence level.

317
317. Faced with the imposing "res novae" of the world of work, the social doctrine of the Church recommends, above all, avoiding the error of considering that the changes in progress occur in a deterministic manner. The decisive factor and "the arbiter" of this complex phase of change is once again the man, who must continue to be the true protagonist of his work. Man can and must take charge, creatively and responsibly, of current innovations and reorganizations, so that they contribute to the growth of the person, the family, society and the entire human family. It is important for everyone to remember the meaning of the subjective dimension of work, which the social doctrine of the Church teaches to give due priority, because human work "comes directly from people created in the image of God and called to prolong, united and for mutual benefit, the work of creation dominating the earth."

318
318. Mechanistic and economic interpretations of productive activity, despite their extension and influence, have been overcome by the same scientific analysis of problems related to work. These conceptions are revealed today, more than yesterday, totally inadequate to interpret the facts, which demonstrate more and more the value of work as a free and creative activity of man. From this concrete reality must also derive the impulse to without delay overcome the theoretical horizons and the narrow and insufficient operational criteria with respect to the current dynamics, intrinsically incapable of identifying the pressing and concrete human needs in their entirety, which go beyond merely economic categories. The Church knows well, and has always taught, that man, unlike any other living being, has needs that are not limited only to "having", because his nature and his vocation are in inseparable relationship with the Transcendent. The human person undertakes the adventure of transforming things through their work to satisfy primarily material needs and deficiencies, but they do so following an impulse that always pushes them beyond the results achieved, in search of what can respond more deeply to their undeniable inner demands.

319
319. The historical forms in which human work is expressed change, but their permanent demands should not change, which are summarized in respect for the inalienable rights of the man who works. Given the risk of seeing these rights denied, new forms of solidarity must be projected and built, taking into account the interdependence that unites working men among themselves. The deeper the changes, the stronger must be the effort of intelligence and will to protect the dignity of work, strengthening, at various levels, the institutions concerned. This perspective allows us to better orient current transformations in the direction, so necessary, of complementarity between the local and global economic dimensions; between «old» and «new» economy; between technological innovation and the requirement to safeguard human work; between economic growth and the environmental compatibility of development.

320
320. The solution of the vast and complex problems of work, which in some areas acquire dramatic dimensions, requires the specific contribution of scientists and men of culture, which is particularly important for the choice of just solutions. It is a responsibility that should lead them to point out the advantages and risks that are emerging in the changes and, above all, to suggest lines of action to guide the change in the most favorable direction for the development of the entire human family. To them corresponds the delicate task of reading and interpreting social phenomena with intelligence and love of the truth, without concerns dictated by group or personal interests. Its contribution, in fact, precisely because it is theoretical in nature, becomes an essential reference for the concrete performance of economic policies.

321
321. The current scenarios of profound transformation of human work make truly global and supportive development even more urgent, capable of reaching all regions of the world, including the least favored. For the latter, the implementation of a far-reaching solidarity development process not only appears as a concrete possibility of creating new jobs, but also represents a true condition for the survival of entire peoples: "Solidarity must be globalized."

322
322. A careful consideration of the new work situation in the current context of globalization is increasingly necessary, from a perspective that values the natural propensity of men to establish relationships. In this regard, it must be stated that universality is a dimension of man, not of things. Technology may be the instrumental cause of globalization, but the universality of the human family is its ultimate cause. Work, therefore, also has a universal dimension, as it is based on the relational character of man. Techniques, especially electronic ones, have made it possible to extend this relational aspect of work to the entire planet, giving globalization a particularly accelerated pace. The ultimate foundation of this dynamism is the man who works, it is always the subjective element and not the objective. Globalized work also has its origin, therefore, in the anthropological foundation of the intrinsic relational dimension of work. The negative aspects of the globalization of work must not harm the possibilities that have been opened for everyone to give expression to a humanism of work at a planetary level, to a solidarity of the world of work at this level, so that working in a similar, extensive and interconnected context, man increasingly understands his unitary and supportive vocation.

323
323. In the Old Testament there is a double position regarding economic goods and wealth. On the one hand, appreciation for the availability of material goods considered necessary for life: sometimes, abundance—but not wealth or luxury—is seen as a blessing from God. In wisdom literature, poverty is described as a negative consequence of leisure and lack of industriousness ( [+[0]+] ), but also as a natural occurrence ( [+[1]+] ). On the other hand, economic goods and wealth are not condemned in themselves, but for their misuse. The prophetic tradition stigmatizes scams, usury, exploitation, and obvious injustices, especially with respect to the poorest ([+[2]+]). This tradition, although it considers the poverty of the oppressed, the weak, the destitute an evil, also sees in it a symbol of man's situation before God; All good comes from Him as a gift that must be administered and shared.

324
324. Whoever recognizes his poverty before God, in whatever situation he lives in, is the object of particular attention from God: when the poor search, the Lord responds; when he shouts, He hears him. Divine promises are addressed to the poor: they will be the heirs of the alliance between God and his people. God's saving intervention will be acted upon through a new David ( [+[0]+] ), who, like and more than King David, will be a defender of the poor and a promoter of justice; He will establish a new covenant and write a new law in the hearts of believers ( [+[1]+] ).

325
325. Jesus assumes the entire tradition of the Old Testament, also regarding economic goods, wealth and poverty, giving it a definitive clarity and fullness ( [+[0]+] ). He, infusing his Spirit and changing hearts, establishes the "Kingdom of God", which makes possible a new coexistence in justice, fraternity, solidarity and sharing. The Kingdom inaugurated by Christ perfects the original goodness of creation and human activity, wounded by sin. Freed from evil and reinstated in communion with God, every man can continue the work of Jesus with the help of his Spirit: doing justice to the poor, liberating the oppressed, comforting the afflicted, actively seeking a new social order, in which adequate solutions to material poverty are offered and the forces that hinder the attempts of the weakest to free themselves from a condition of misery and slavery are more effectively counteracted. When this happens, the Kingdom of God is already present on this earth, even though it does not belong to it. In him they will finally find fulfillment of the promises of the Prophets.

326
326. In the light of Revelation, economic activity must be considered and exercised as a grateful response to the vocation that God reserves for each man. This has been placed in the garden to cultivate and guard it, using it according to very precise limits ([+[0]+]), with the commitment to perfect it ([+[1]+]). By becoming a witness to the greatness and goodness of the Creator, man walks towards the fullness of the freedom to which God calls him. A good administration of the gifts received, including material gifts, is a work of justice towards oneself and towards other men: what is received must be well used, preserved, multiplied, as the parable of the talents teaches ([+[2]+]).

327
327. Faith in Jesus Christ allows a correct understanding of social development, in the context of a comprehensive and supportive humanism. For this, the contribution of the theological reflection offered by the social Magisterium is very useful: «Faith in Christ the Redeemer, while it illuminates internally the nature of development, also guides in the task of collaboration. In Saint Paul's letter to the Colossians we read that Christ is “the firstborn of all creation” and that “everything was created by him and for him” ( [+[0]+] ). In fact, “everything has its consistency in him” because “God saw fit to make all fullness reside in him and to reconcile all things through him and for him” ([+[1]+]). In this divine plan, which begins from eternity in Christ, the perfect “Image” of the Father, and culminates in him, “Firstborn from the dead” ( [+[2]+] ), our history is inserted, marked by our personal and collective effort to elevate the human condition, overcome the obstacles that always arise in our path, thus preparing ourselves to participate in the fullness that “resides in the Lord” and that he communicates “to his body, the Church” ( [+[3]+] ), while the Sin, which always stalks us and compromises our human achievements, is defeated and rescued by the “reconciliation” wrought by Christ ( [+[4]+] ) ».

328
328. Assets, even when legitimately possessed, always retain a universal destiny. Any form of improper accumulation is immoral, because it is in open contradiction with the universal destiny that God the creator assigned to all goods. Christian salvation is an integral liberation of man, liberation from need, but also from possession itself: "For the root of all evil is the desire for money, and some, by allowing themselves to be carried away by it, have strayed from the faith" ([+[0]+]). The Fathers of the Church insist on the need for conversion and the transformation of the consciences of believers, more than on the demand to change the social and political structures of their time, urging those who carry out economic activity and own property to consider themselves administrators of all that God has entrusted to them.

329
329. Wealth fulfills its function of service to man when it is destined to produce benefits for others and for society: "How could we do good to our neighbor," asks Clement of Alexandria, "if no one owned anything?" ». In the vision of Saint John Chrysostom, wealth belongs to some so that they can gain merit by sharing it with others. Wealth is a good that comes from God: whoever possesses it must use it and circulate it, so that those in need can also enjoy it; Evil is found in the disordered attachment to wealth, in the desire to hoard it. Saint Basil the Great invites the rich to open the doors of their warehouses and exclaims: "A great river pours, in a thousand channels, over the fertile ground: thus, through a thousand paths, you bring wealth to the homes of the poor." Wealth, Saint Basil explains, is like the water that flows increasingly purer from the fountain if it is drunk frequently, while it rots if the fountain remains unused. The rich man, Saint Gregory the Great would later say, is nothing more than a steward of what he owns; Giving what is necessary to those who lack it is a work that must be carried out with humility, because goods do not belong to those who distribute them. He who has wealth only for himself is not innocent; Giving them to those in need means paying a debt.

330
330. The social doctrine of the Church insists on the moral connotation of the economy. Pius The so-called economic laws, founded on the nature of things and on the nature of the human body and soul, establish, of course, with complete certainty which ends cannot and which cannot, and with what means, human activity can achieve within the economic order; but reason also, equally relying on the nature of things and of man, individually and socially considered, clearly demonstrates that an end has been prescribed for this economic order as a whole by God the Creator. One and the same is, in fact, the moral law that commands us to seek, just as directly in the totality of our actions our supreme and final end, so also in each of the particular orders those ends that we understand that nature or, rather, the author of nature, God, has established for each order of feasible things, and submit them subordinately to it.

331
331. The relationship between morality and economy is necessary and intrinsic: economic activity and moral behavior are intimately intertwined. The necessary distinction between morality and economics does not entail a separation between the two areas, but on the contrary, an important reciprocity. Just as in the moral field the reasons and demands of the economy must be taken into account, action in the economic field must be open to moral instances: «Also in economic-social life the dignity of the human person, his entire vocation and the good of the entire society must be respected and promoted. Because man is the author, the center and the end of all economic-social life. Giving fair and due weight to the reasons inherent to the economy does not mean rejecting as irrational all meta-economic considerations, precisely because the end of the economy is not in the economy itself, but in its human and social destiny. The economy, in fact, both in the scientific field and at the practical level, is not entrusted with the goal of man's fulfillment and good human coexistence, but with a partial task: the production, distribution and consumption of material goods and services.

332
332. The moral dimension of the economy makes it clear that economic efficiency and the promotion of solidarity-based development of humanity are closely linked goals, rather than separate or alternative ones. Morality, constitutive of economic life, is neither contrary nor neutral: when it is inspired by justice and solidarity, it constitutes a factor of social efficiency for the same economy. It is a duty to efficiently develop the production activity of goods, otherwise resources are wasted; But economic growth obtained at the expense of human beings, social groups and entire peoples, condemned to destitution and exclusion, is not acceptable. The expansion of wealth, visible in the availability of goods and services, and the moral demand for a fair diffusion of the latter must stimulate man and society as a whole to practice the essential virtue of solidarity, to combat with a spirit of justice and charity, wherever they exist, the "structures of sin" that generate and maintain poverty, underdevelopment and degradation. These structures are built and consolidated by many concrete acts of human selfishness.

333
333. To assume a moral profile, economic activity must have all men and all peoples as subjects. Everyone has the right to participate in economic life and the duty to contribute, according to their capabilities, to the progress of their own country and the entire human family. If, to some extent, everyone is responsible for everyone, each one has the duty to commit to the economic development of all: it is a duty of solidarity and justice, but it is also the best way to make progress for all humanity. When lived with a moral sense, the economy is carried out as a provision of a reciprocal service, through the production of goods and services useful for the growth of each person, and it becomes for each man an opportunity to live solidarity and the vocation to "communion with other men, for which he was created by God." The effort to conceive and carry out economic-social projects capable of promoting a more just society and a more humane world represents a difficult challenge, but also a stimulating duty, for all economic agents and for those who dedicate themselves to economic sciences.

334
334. The object of the economy is the formation of wealth and its progressive increase, in not only quantitative but also qualitative terms: all of which is morally correct if it is oriented towards the global and supportive development of man and the society in which he lives and works. Development, in fact, cannot be reduced to a mere process of accumulation of goods and services. On the contrary, pure accumulation, even if it were for the common good, is not a sufficient condition for the realization of authentic human happiness. In this sense, the social Magisterium warns against the insidiousness that hides a type of only quantitative development, since the "excessive availability of all kinds of material goods for some social categories, easily makes men slaves of "possession" and immediate enjoyment... It is the so-called civilization of "consumption" or consumerism... ".

335
335. From the perspective of integral and supportive development, one can precisely appreciate the moral assessment that social doctrine places on the market economy, or simply free economy: «If by “capitalism” is understood an economic system that recognizes the fundamental and positive role of the company, of the market, of private property and the consequent responsibility for the means of production, of free human creativity in the sector of the economy, the answer is certainly positive, although perhaps it would be more appropriate to speak of “business economy”, “business economy”. market” or simply “free economy”. But if by “capitalism” is understood a system in which freedom, in the economic sphere, is not framed in a solid legal context that places it at the service of integral human freedom and considers it as a particular dimension of it, whose center is ethical and religious, then the answer is absolutely negative. In this way, the Christian perspective on the social and political conditions of economic activity is defined: not only its rules, but also its moral quality and meaning.

336
336. The social doctrine of the Church considers the freedom of the person in the economic field a fundamental value and an inalienable right that must be promoted and protected: "Everyone has the right of economic initiative, and will be able to legitimately use their talents to contribute to an abundance beneficial to all, and to reap the just fruits of their efforts." This teaching warns against the negative consequences that would arise from the restriction or denial of the right of economic initiative: "Experience shows us that the denial of such right or its limitation in the name of a supposed "equality" for everyone in society reduces or, without further ado, in fact destroys the spirit of initiative, that is, the creative subjectivity of the citizen." In this sense, free and responsible initiative in the economic field can also be defined as an act that reveals the humanity of man as a creative and relational subject. The economic initiative must therefore enjoy ample space. The State has the moral obligation to impose restrictive ties only in order to address the incompatibilities between the pursuit of the common good and the type of economic activity launched, or its development modalities.

337
337. The creative dimension is an essential element of human action, also in the business field, and is especially manifested in the ability to develop projects and innovate: «Organizing this productive effort, scheduling its duration over time, ensuring that it corresponds positively to the needs it must satisfy, assuming the necessary risks: all this is also a source of wealth in today's society. Thus, the role of human, disciplined and creative work, and that of the capacities for initiative and entrepreneurial spirit, as an essential part of the same work, becomes increasingly evident and determining. As the foundation of this teaching we must point out the conviction that "man's main resource is, along with the earth, man himself." It is his intelligence that discovers the productive potential of the earth and the multiple modalities with which human needs can be satisfied.

338
338. The company must be characterized by the ability to serve the common good of society through the production of useful goods and services. In this production of goods and services with a logic of efficiency and satisfaction of the interests of the various subjects involved, the company creates wealth for the entire society: not only for the owners, but also for the other subjects interested in its activity. In addition to this typically economic function, the company also plays a social function, creating opportunities for meeting, collaboration, and valuing the capabilities of the people involved. In the company, therefore, the economic dimension is a condition for the achievement of not only economic, but also social and moral objectives, which must be pursued jointly.

339
339. The members of the company must be aware that the community in which they work represents a good for all and not a structure that allows the exclusive satisfaction of the personal interests of some. Only this awareness allows us to build an economy truly at the service of man and develop a project of real cooperation between social parties.

340
340. Social doctrine recognizes the fair function of profit, as the first indicator of the proper functioning of the company: "When a company makes profits it means that the productive factors have been used appropriately." This cannot make us forget the fact that profit does not always indicate that the company is adequately serving society. It is possible, for example, "that the economic balances are correct and that at the same time the men, who constitute the most valuable asset of the company, are humiliated and offended in their dignity." This happens when the company operates in sociocultural systems characterized by the exploitation of people, prone to shirk social justice obligations and violate workers' rights.

341
341. If in economic and financial activity the search for a fair profit is acceptable, the resort to usury is morally condemned: «Traffickers whose usurious and commercial practices cause the hunger and death of their fellow men, indirectly commit homicide. This is attributable to them. This condemnation also extends to international economic relations, especially with regard to the situation of less developed countries, to which "abusive, if not usurious, financial systems" cannot be applied. The recent Magisterium has used strong and clear words regarding this still dramatically widespread practice: "Usury, a crime that is also an infamous reality in our days, capable of strangling the lives of many people."

342
342. The company today moves within the framework of economic scenarios of increasingly broader dimensions, where national States have a limited capacity to govern the rapid processes of change that affect international economic-financial relations; This situation induces companies to assume new and greater responsibilities with respect to the past. Its role, today more than ever, is decisive for an authentically supportive and integral development of humanity and equally decisive, in this sense, its acceptance of the fact that "development either becomes a fact common to all parts of the world or suffers a process of regression even in areas marked by constant progress. This phenomenon is particularly indicative of the nature of authentic development: either all the nations of the world participate in it, or it certainly will not be such.

343
343. Economic initiative is an expression of human intelligence and the need to respond to human needs with creativity and collaboration. The authentic notion of business competence is inscribed in creativity and cooperation: a cum-petere, that is, searching together for the most appropriate solutions to respond in the most suitable way to the needs that progressively arise. The sense of responsibility that springs from free economic initiative is configured not only as an individual virtue indispensable for the human growth of the individual, but also as a social virtue necessary for the development of a supportive community: "In this process, important virtues are involved, such as diligence, industriousness, prudence in assuming reasonable risks, reliability and loyalty in interpersonal relationships, resolution of spirit in the execution of difficult and painful decisions, but necessary for the common work of the company and to face eventual reversals of fortune.

344
344. The role of the entrepreneur and the leader is of central importance from a social point of view, because they are located at the heart of the network of technical, commercial, financial and cultural links that characterize the modern reality of the company. Since business decisions produce, due to the growing complexity of business activity, multiple joint effects of great relevance not only economically, but also socially, the exercise of business and managerial responsibilities requires, in addition to a continuous effort of specific updating, a constant reflection on the moral values ​​that must guide the personal choices of those who are invested with such functions.

345
345. Social doctrine insists on the need for employers and leaders to commit to structuring work activity in their companies in a way that favors the family, especially mothers in the exercise of their duties; that support, in the light of a comprehensive vision of man and development, the demand for quality “of the merchandise that is produced and consumed; quality of public services enjoyed; quality of the environment and life in general »; to invest, if the economic conditions and political stability for this are met, in those places and productive sectors that offer individuals and peoples "the opportunity to give value to their own work."

346
346. One of the priority issues in economics is the use of resources, that is, of all those goods and services to which economic subjects, producers and consumers, private and public, attribute a value due to their inherent usefulness in the field of production and consumption. Resources are quantitatively scarce in nature, which necessarily implies that the particular economic subject, as well as society, have to invent some strategy to use them in the most rational way possible, following a logic dictated by the principle of economicity. Both the effective solution of the most general and fundamental economic problem of the limitation of means with respect to individual and social, private and public needs, as well as the global, structural and functional efficiency of the entire economic system depend on this. Such efficiency appeals directly to the responsibility and capacity of various subjects, such as the market, the State and intermediate social bodies.

347
347. The free market is a socially important institution due to its ability to guarantee efficient results in the production of goods and services. Historically, the market has proven to know how to initiate and sustain economic development in the long term. There are good reasons to maintain that, in many circumstances, "the free market is the most effective instrument for allocating resources and responding effectively to needs." The social doctrine of the Church appreciates the certain advantages offered by free market mechanisms, both to better use resources and to speed up the exchange of products: these mechanisms, "above all, give primacy to the will and preferences of the person, which, in the contract, are confronted with those of other people."

348
348. The free market cannot be judged regardless of the purposes it pursues and the values it transmits at a social level. The market, in effect, cannot find in itself the principle of its own legitimation. It belongs to individual conscience and public responsibility to establish a fair relationship between means and ends. The individual utility of the economic agent, although legitimate, should never become the only objective. Next to this, there is another, equally fundamental and superior, social utility, which must be sought not in contrast, but in coherence with the logic of the market. When it performs the important functions mentioned above, the free market is oriented towards the common good and the integral development of man, while the inversion of the relationship between means and ends can make it degenerate into an inhuman and alienating institution, with uncontrollable repercussions.

349
349. The social doctrine of the Church, while recognizing the function of the market as an irreplaceable instrument of regulation within the economic system, highlights the need to subject it to moral purposes that ensure and, at the same time, adequately circumscribe the space of its autonomy. The idea that the market can be entrusted alone with the supply of all categories of goods cannot be shared, because it is based on a reductive vision of the person and society. Faced with the concrete risk of an "idolatry" of the market, the social doctrine of the Church highlights its limits, easily perceptible in its proven inability to satisfy important human demands, which require goods that, "by their nature, are not and cannot be simple commodities," non-negotiable goods according to the rule of "exchange of equivalents" and the logic of the contract, typical of the market.

350
350. The market assumes a relevant social function in contemporary societies, which is why it is important to identify its best potential and create conditions that allow its concrete development. Agents must be effectively free to compare, evaluate and choose between the various options. However, freedom, in the economic sphere, must be regulated by an appropriate legal framework, capable of putting it at the service of integral human freedom: «Economic freedom is only one element of human freedom. When it becomes autonomous, that is, when man is considered more as a producer or consumer of goods than as a subject who produces and consumes to live, then he loses his necessary relationship with the human person and ends up alienating and oppressing him.

351
351. The action of the State and other public powers must conform to the principle of subsidiarity and create situations favorable to the free exercise of economic activity; It must also be inspired by the principle of solidarity and establish the limits to the autonomy of the parties to defend the weakest. Solidarity without subsidiarity can easily degenerate into welfareism, while subsidiarity without solidarity runs the risk of fueling forms of selfish localism. To respect these two fundamental principles, the intervention of the State in the economic sphere must be neither unlimited nor insufficient, but proportionate to the real demands of society: "The State has the duty to support the activity of companies, creating conditions that ensure job opportunities, stimulating it where it is insufficient or supporting it in times of crisis. The State also has the right to intervene when particular monopoly situations create delays or obstacles to development. But, apart from these duties of harmonization and direction of development, the State can exercise substitute functions in exceptional situations.

352
352. The fundamental task of the State in the economic field is to define a legal framework suitable for regulating economic relations, in order to "safeguard... the fundamental conditions of a free economy, which presupposes a certain equality between the parties, lest one of them so much surpasses the other in power that it can practically reduce it to slavery." Economic activity, especially in a free market context, cannot develop in an institutional, legal and political vacuum: "On the contrary, it supposes a security that guarantees individual freedom and property, in addition to a stable monetary system and efficient public services." To carry out its task, the State must develop timely legislation, but also direct economic and social policies with circumspection, without causing a detriment to the various market activities, whose development must remain free of authoritarian or, worse still, totalitarian superstructures and constraints.

353
353. It is necessary for the market and the State to act in concert and be complementary. The free market can provide beneficial effects to the community only in the presence of a State organization that defines and guides the direction of economic development, that enforces fair and transparent rules, that also intervenes directly, during the time strictly necessary, in cases where the market fails to obtain the desired efficiency results and when it comes to putting the redistributive principle into practice. Indeed, in some areas, the market is not capable, relying on its own mechanisms, of guaranteeing an equitable distribution of some goods and services essential for the human development of citizens: in this case, the complementarity between State and market is more necessary than ever.

354
354. The State can urge citizens and companies to promote the common good, establishing and practicing an economic policy that favors the participation of all its citizens in productive activities. Respect for the principle of subsidiarity must encourage public authorities to seek favorable conditions for the development of individual initiative capacities, autonomy and personal responsibility of citizens, refraining from any intervention that could constitute an undue conditioning of business forces.

355
355. Tax revenues and public spending assume a crucial economic importance for the civil and political community: the objective towards which they must strive is to achieve public finance capable of being an instrument of development and solidarity. A fair, efficient and effective public treasury produces virtuous effects on the economy, because it manages to promote the growth of employment, sustain business activities and non-profit initiatives, and contributes to increasing the credibility of the State as guarantor of social security and protection systems, intended in particular to protect the weakest.

356
356. The economic-social system must be characterized by the joint presence of public and private action, including non-profit private action. A plurality of decision centers and action logics are thus configured. There are some categories of goods, collective and common use, whose use cannot depend on market mechanisms and which are not the exclusive competence of the State. The task of the State, in relation to these goods, is rather to value all social and economic initiatives, promoted by intermediate formations that have public effects. Civil society, organized in its intermediate bodies, is capable of contributing to the achievement of the common good by entering into a relationship of collaboration and effective complementarity with respect to the State and the market, thus favoring the development of a timely economic democracy. In such a context, State intervention must be structured in order to exercise true solidarity, which as such should never be separated from subsidiarity.

357
357. Private non-profit organizations have their specific space in the economic sphere. These organizations are characterized by the courageous attempt to harmoniously combine productive efficiency and solidarity. Normally, they are established on the basis of an associative pact and are an expression of the tension towards a common ideal of the subjects who freely decide to join. The State must respect the nature of these organizations and value their characteristics, specifically applying the principle of subsidiarity, which precisely postulates the respect and promotion of the dignity and autonomous responsibility of the "subsidized" subject.

358
358. Consumers, who in many cases have wide margins of purchasing power, well above the subsistence threshold, can significantly influence economic reality with their free choice between consumption and savings. Indeed, the possibility of influencing the options of the economic system is in the hands of those who must decide on the destination of their own financial resources. Today, more than in the past, it is possible to evaluate the available alternatives, not only based on the expected return or their degree of risk, but also by expressing a value judgment on the investment projects that the resources will finance, aware that "the option of investing in one place and not another, in one productive sector instead of another, is always a moral and cultural option."

359
359. The use of one's purchasing power must be exercised in the context of the moral demands of justice and solidarity, and of precise social responsibilities: one must not forget "the duty of charity, that is, the duty to help with one's "superfluous" and, sometimes, even with one's "necessary", to give the poor what is essential to live." This responsibility gives consumers the possibility of guiding, thanks to the greater circulation of information, the behavior of producers, through the decision—individual or collective—to prefer the products of some companies over others, taking into account not only the prices and quality of the products, but also the existence of correct working conditions in the companies, the effort to protect the natural environment that surrounds them, etc.

360
360. The phenomenon of consumerism produces a persistent orientation towards "having" instead of towards "being." Consumerism prevents "correctly distinguishing the new and higher forms of satisfaction of new human needs, which are an obstacle to the formation of a mature personality." To contrast this phenomenon, it is necessary to strive to build "lifestyles, according to which the search for truth, beauty and goodness, as well as communion with other men for common growth, are the elements that determine consumption, savings and investment options." It is undeniable that the influences of the social context on lifestyles are notable: therefore the cultural challenge, which consumerism presents today, must be faced more incisively, especially if we think about future generations, who run the risk of having to live in a natural environment depleted due to excessive and disorderly consumption.

361
361. Our time is marked by the complex phenomenon of economic-financial globalization, that is, by a process of growing integration of national economies, at the level of trade in goods and services and financial transactions, in which an increasing number of operators assume a global horizon for the decisions they must make based on opportunities for growth and profit. The new horizon of global society is not given so much by the simple presence of economic and financial links between national agents operating in different countries - which, on the other hand, have always existed - but rather by the absolutely unprecedented expansion and nature of the system of relations that is being developed. The role of financial markets is increasingly decisive and central, the size of which, as a result of the liberalization of trade and the circulation of capital, has increased enormously with impressive speed, to the point of allowing operators to move large amounts of capital "in real time", from one part of the planet to the other. It is a multiform reality that is not easy to decipher, since it develops at various levels and continually evolves, according to trajectories that are difficult to predict.

362
362. Globalization fuels new hopes, but also raises big questions.

363
363. The growth of the common good requires taking advantage of new opportunities to redistribute wealth among the various areas of the planet, in favor of those most in need, until now excluded or marginalized from social and economic progress: "In short, the challenge is to ensure globalization in solidarity, a globalization without leaving anyone on the sidelines." Technological progress itself runs the risk of unfairly distributing its own positive effects among countries. Innovations, in fact, can penetrate and spread in a given community, if their potential beneficiaries reach a minimum level of knowledge and financial resources: it is evident that, in the presence of strong disparities between countries in access to technical-scientific knowledge and the most recent technological products, the globalization process ends up delaying, rather than reducing, inequalities between countries in terms of economic and social development. Given the nature of the dynamics underway, the free movement of capital is not sufficient by itself to favor the rapprochement of developing countries with the most advanced countries.

364
364. Trade represents a fundamental component of international economic relations, contributing decisively to the productive specialization and economic growth of various countries. Today, more than ever, international trade, if properly oriented, promotes development and is capable of creating new sources of work and providing useful resources. Social doctrine has often denounced the distortions of the international trade system that, often, due to protectionist policies, discriminates against products from poor countries and hinders the growth of industrial activities and the transfer of technology to these countries. The continuous deterioration in the terms of trade of raw materials and the worsening of differences between rich and poor countries has prompted the Magisterium to demand the importance of ethical criteria that should guide international economic relations: the pursuit of the common good and the universal destination of goods; equity in business relationships; attention to the rights and needs of the poorest in trade and international cooperation policies. Otherwise, "poor people always remain poor, and the rich become richer and richer."

365
365. Solidarity appropriate to the era of globalization requires the defense of human rights. In this regard, the Magisterium points out that the presence "of an international public authority at the service of human rights, freedom and peace, not only has not yet been completely achieved, but it must be noted, unfortunately, the frequent indecision of the international community regarding the duty to respect and apply human rights. This duty concerns all fundamental rights and does not allow arbitrary decisions that would end in forms of discrimination and injustice. At the same time, we are witnessing the increase in a worrying divergence between a series of new “rights” promoted in technologically advanced societies and basic human rights that are still not respected in situations of underdevelopment: I am thinking, for example, of the right to food, drinking water, housing, self-determination and independence.

366
366. The extension of globalization must be accompanied by a more mature awareness, on the part of civil society organizations, of the new tasks to which they are called at the global level. Thanks also to decisive action on the part of these organizations, it will be possible to place the current process of growth of the economy and finance on a planetary scale on a horizon that guarantees effective respect for the rights of man and people, as well as a fair distribution of resources, within each country and between the various countries: "Free exchange is only equitable if it is subject to the demands of social justice."

367
367. In the era of globalization, solidarity between generations must be strongly emphasized: « Before, solidarity between generations was in many countries a natural attitude on the part of the family; Now it has also become a community duty. It is logical that this solidarity continues to be promoted in national political communities, but today the problem also arises in the global political community, so that globalization is not carried out at the expense of the weakest and most needy. Solidarity between generations requires that global planning act according to the principle of the universal destination of goods, which makes it morally illicit and economically counterproductive to offload current costs on future generations: morally illicit, because it means not assuming due responsibilities, economically counterproductive because correcting damage is more costly than prevention. This principle must be applied, above all,—although not only—in the field of the earth's resources and the safeguarding of creation, which is particularly delicate due to globalization, which concerns the entire planet understood as a single ecosystem.

368
368. Financial markets are certainly not a novelty of our time: for a long time, in various ways, they have been responsible for responding to the need to finance productive activities. Historical experience teaches that in the absence of adequate financial systems, economic growth would not have been possible. Large-scale investments, typical of modern market economies, would not have been carried out without the fundamental intermediary role carried out by financial markets, which has made it possible, among other things, to appreciate the positive functions of savings for the development of the economic and social system. If the creation of what has been defined as "the global capital market" has produced beneficial effects, thanks to the fact that the greater mobility of capital has facilitated the availability of resources for productive activities, the increase in mobility, on the other hand, has also increased the risk of financial crises. The development of finance, whose transactions have considerably exceeded real ones in volume, runs the risk of following an increasingly self-referential logic, without connection with the real basis of the economy.

369
369. A financial economy with an end in itself is destined to contradict its purposes, since it deprives itself of its roots and its constitutive reason, that is, of its original and essential role of service to the real economy and, ultimately, of development of people and human communities. The global picture is even more worrying in light of the strongly asymmetric configuration that characterizes the international financial system: the processes of innovation and deregulation of financial markets effectively tend to be consolidated only in some parts of the planet. Which is a source of serious concerns of an ethical nature, because the countries excluded from the processes described, even if they do not enjoy the benefits of these products, are nevertheless not protected against possible negative consequences of financial instability in their real economic systems, especially if they are fragile and underdeveloped.

370
370. The loss of centrality on the part of state actors must coincide with a greater commitment by the international community in the exercise of a decisive role in economic and financial management. An important consequence of the globalization process, in fact, consists of the gradual loss of effectiveness of the Nation State in guiding national economic-financial dynamics. The governments of each of the countries see their own action in the economic and social field conditioned more and more strongly by the expectations of the international capital markets and by the insistent demand for credibility coming from the financial world. Due to the new links between global operators, the traditional defensive measures of the States appear doomed to failure and, in the face of the new areas of attributions, the very notion of the national market takes a backseat.

371
371. The higher levels of organizational and functional complexity the global economic-financial system reaches, the more priority becomes the task of regulating these processes, directing them to achieve the common good of the human family. Specifically, the demand arises that, beyond national states, it is the international community itself that assumes this delicate function, with adequate and effective political and legal instruments.

372
372. Politics, like the economy, must also know how to extend its radius of action beyond national boundaries, quickly acquiring a global operational dimension that allows it to direct ongoing processes in the light of not only economic, but also moral parameters. The underlying objective will be to guide these processes, ensuring respect for the dignity of man and the complete development of his personality, within the horizon of the common good. Taking on such a task entails the responsibility of accelerating the consolidation of existing institutions, as well as the creation of new organizations to which to entrust this responsibility. Economic development, in fact, can be lasting if it is carried out within a clear and defined framework of norms and in a broad project of moral, civil and cultural growth of the entire human family.

373
373. One of the fundamental tasks of the agents of the international economy is the achievement of comprehensive and supportive development for humanity, that is, "promoting all men and the whole man." This task requires a conception of the economy that guarantees, at the international level, the equitable distribution of resources and responds to the awareness of interdependence—economic, political and cultural—that already definitively unites peoples with each other and makes them feel linked to a single destiny. Social problems increasingly acquire a planetary dimension. No State alone can confront and resolve them. Current generations directly experience the need for solidarity and concretely realize the importance of overcoming individualistic culture. The demand for development models that not only provide for "elevating all peoples to the level enjoyed today by the richest countries, but also for founding a more dignified life on solidarity work, effectively growing the dignity and creativity of every person, their capacity to respond to their own vocation and, therefore, to the call of God," is increasingly being recorded.

374
374. A more humane and supportive development will also help the rich countries themselves. These countries "often notice a kind of existential loss, an inability to live and rightly enjoy the meaning of life, even in the midst of an abundance of material goods, an alienation and loss of their own humanity in many people, who feel reduced to the role of gears in the mechanism of production and consumption and do not find a way to affirm their own dignity as men, created in the image and likeness of God." Rich countries have proven to have the capacity to create material well-being, but they have often done so at the expense of men and the weaker social classes: «It cannot be ignored that the borders of wealth and poverty cross within the same societies, both developed and developing. Well, just as social inequalities exist up to levels of misery in rich countries, so, in parallel, in less developed countries, disconcerting and scandalous manifestations of selfishness and ostentation are often seen.

375
375. For social doctrine, the economy «is only one aspect and one dimension of complex human activity. If it is absolutized, if the production and consumption of goods occupy the center of social life and become the only value of society, not subordinated to any other, the cause must be sought not only and not so much in the economic system itself, but in the fact that the entire sociocultural system, by ignoring the ethical and religious dimension, has been weakened, limiting itself only to the production of goods and services. The life of man, like the social life of the community, cannot be reduced to a materialist dimension, even when material goods are very necessary both for the purposes of survival and to improve the tenor of life: "Increasing the sense of God and the knowledge of oneself constitutes the basis of all complete development of human society."

376
376. Given the rapid development of technical-economic progress and the equally rapid mutation of production and consumption processes, the Magisterium warns of the need to propose a great educational and cultural work: «The demand for a qualitatively more satisfactory and richer existence is something in itself legitimate; However, we must highlight the new responsibilities and dangers attached to this historical phase... When discovering new needs and new modalities for their satisfaction, it is necessary to allow ourselves to be guided by an integral image of man, which respects all the dimensions of his being and which subordinates the material and instinctive to the interior and spiritual... A great educational and cultural work is, therefore, necessary and urgent, which includes the education of consumers for a responsible use of their capacity to choose, the formation of a deep sense of responsibility in producers and especially in "social media professionals, in addition to the necessary intervention of public authorities."

377
377. The people of Israel, in the initial phase of their history, do not have a king, like the other peoples, because they recognize only the lordship of Yahweh. God intervenes in history through charismatic men, as the Book of Judges attests. To the last of these men, Samuel, judge and prophet, the people will ask for a king ( [+[0]+] ). Samuel warns the Israelites of the consequences of a despotic exercise of kingship ( [+[1]+] ). Royal power, however, can also be experienced as a gift from Yahweh who comes to the aid of his people ( [+[2]+] ). In the end, Saul will receive the royal anointing ( [+[3]+] ). The event highlights the tensions that led Israel to a conception of kingship different from that of neighboring peoples: the king, chosen by Yahweh ( [+[4]+] ) and consecrated by him ( [+[5]+] ), will be seen as his son ( [+[6]+] ) and must make his lordship and his design of salvation visible ( [+[7]+] ). He must, therefore, become a defender of the weak and assure the people of justice: the denunciations of the prophets will be directed precisely at the errors of the kings ( [+[8]+] ).

378
378. The prototype of Yahweh's chosen king is David, whose humble condition is gratifyingly underlined by the biblical narrative ( [+[0]+] ). David is the depositary of the promise ([+[1]+]), which makes him the initiator of a special royal tradition, the "messianic" tradition. This, despite all the sins and infidelities of David himself and his successors, culminates in Jesus Christ, the "anointed of Yahweh" ([+[2]+]) par excellence, son of David ([+[3]+]).

379
379. Jesus rejects the oppressive and despotic power of the leaders over the Nations ( [+[0]+] ) and their claim to call themselves benefactors ( [+[1]+] ), but he never directly rejects the authorities of his time. In the diatribe on the payment of tribute to Caesar ( [+[2]+] ), he affirms that it is necessary to give to God what belongs to God, implicitly condemning any attempt to divinize and absolutize temporal power: only God can demand everything from man. At the same time, temporal power has the right to what is due to it: Jesus does not consider the tribute to Caesar unjust.

380
380. Submission, not passive, but for reasons of conscience ([+[0]+]), to the constituted power responds to the order established by God. Saint Paul defines the relationships and duties of Christians towards authorities ( [+[1]+] ). He insists on the civic duty to pay taxes: « Give to each what is owed: to whom taxes, taxes; to whom I tribute, tribute; who I respect, I respect; to whom honor, honor » ( [+[2]+] ). The Apostle certainly does not intend to legitimize all power, but rather to help Christians "to seek good in the sight of all men" ([+[3]+]), including relationships with authority, insofar as it is at the service of God for the good of the person ([+[4]+]) and "to do justice and punish those who do evil" ([+[5]+]).

381
381. The prayer for rulers, recommended by Saint Paul during the persecutions, explicitly points out what political authority must guarantee: a peaceful and tranquil life, carried out with all piety and dignity ( [+[0]+] ). Christians must be "ready for every good work" ([+[1]+]), "showing perfect meekness toward all men" ([+[2]+]), conscious of having been saved not by their works, but by the mercy of God. Without the “bath of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which he poured out upon us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior” ([+[3]+]), all men are “fools, disobedient, gone astray, slaves to all kinds of passions and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another” ([+[4]+]). We must not forget the misery of the human condition, marked by sin and rescued by the love of God.

382
382. When human power exceeds the order desired by God, it deifies itself and demands absolute submission: it then becomes the Beast of the Apocalypse, the image of the persecuting imperial power, drunk with "the blood of the saints and the blood of the martyrs of Jesus" ([+[0]+]). The Beast has at his service the "false prophet" ([+[1]+]), who moves men to worship him with portents that seduce. This vision prophetically points out all the schemes used by Satan to govern men, insinuating himself into their spirit with lies. But Christ is the Conquering Lamb of all power that in the course of human history becomes absolutized. In the face of this power, Saint John recommends the resistance of the martyrs: in this way believers testify that the corrupt and satanic power has been defeated, because it has no influence over them.

383
383. The Church announces that Christ, conqueror of death, reigns over the universe that He Himself has rescued. His Kingdom also includes the present time and will end only when everything will be consigned to the Father and human history will be concluded with the final judgment ( [+[0]+] ). Christ reveals to human authority, always tempted by dominance, that its authentic and full meaning is one of service. God is the only Father and Christ is the only teacher for all men, who are brothers. Sovereignty belongs to God. The Lord, however, “has not wanted to retain for Himself alone the exercise of all powers. Give each creature the functions it is capable of performing, according to the capabilities of its nature. This mode of government must be imitated in social life. God's behavior in the government of the world, which manifests so much respect for human freedom, should inspire the wisdom of those who govern human communities. These must behave as ministers of divine providence.

384
384. The human person is the foundation and the end of political coexistence. Endowed with rationality, man is responsible for his own decisions and capable of pursuing projects that give meaning to his life, on an individual and social level. Openness to Transcendence and others is the trait that characterizes and distinguishes it: only in relation to Transcendence and others does the human person reach their full and complete fulfillment. This means that being a social and political creature by nature, "social life is therefore not accidental overload for man," but rather an essential and unavoidable dimension.

385
385. The political community finds its authentic dimension in the reference to the people: it "is, and in reality must be, the organic and organizing unit of a true people." The people are not an amorphous multitude, an inert mass to manipulate and instrumentalize, but rather a group of people, each of whom — "in their own position and according to their own way" — has the possibility of forming their opinion about public affairs and the freedom to express their political sensitivity and make it count in a manner convenient for the common good. The people "live from the fullness of life of the men who compose it, each of whom... is a person aware of his own responsibility and his own convictions." Those who belong to a political community, even though they are organically united with each other as a people, nevertheless retain an insuppressible autonomy in their personal existence and in the goals they pursue.

386
386. What characterizes a people in the first place is the fact of sharing life and values, a source of spiritual and moral communion: «Human society... must be considered, above all, as a reality of a primarily spiritual order: one that drives men, illuminated by the truth, to communicate the most diverse knowledge among themselves; to defend their rights and fulfill their duties; to desire the goods of the spirit; to enjoy in common the just pleasure of beauty in all its manifestations; to continually feel inclined to share the best of themselves with others; to eagerly assimilate, for one's own benefit, the spiritual goods of one's neighbor. All these values ​​inform and, at the same time, direct the manifestations of culture, of the economy, of social coexistence, of progress and of the political order, of the legal system and, finally, of all the elements that constitute the external expression of the human community in its incessant development.

387
387. Each town normally corresponds to a Nation, but, for various reasons, national boundaries do not always coincide with ethnic boundaries. Thus arises the question of minorities, which historically have given rise to quite a few conflicts. The Magisterium affirms that minorities constitute groups with specific rights and duties. First of all, a minority group has the right to its own existence: "This right may not be taken into account in various ways, going so far as to be denied through obvious or indirect forms of genocide." Furthermore, minorities have the right to maintain their culture, including language, as well as their religious convictions, including the celebration of worship. In the legitimate claim of their rights, minorities may be pushed to seek greater autonomy or even independence: in these delicate circumstances, dialogue and negotiation are the way to achieve peace. In any case, resorting to terrorism is unjustifiable and would damage the cause that is intended to be defended. Minorities also have duties to fulfill, among which is, above all, cooperation for the common good of the State in which they are located. In particular, "the minority group has the duty to promote the freedom and dignity of each of its members and to respect the decisions of each individual, even when one of them decides to transition to the majority culture."

388
388. Considering the human person as the foundation and end of the political community means working, above all, for the recognition and respect of their dignity through the protection and promotion of the fundamental and inalienable rights of man: "In the current era it is considered that the common good consists mainly of the defense of the rights and duties of the human person." Human rights condense the main moral and legal requirements that must govern the construction of the political community. These constitute an objective norm that is the foundation of positive law and that cannot be ignored by the political community, because the person is, from the ontological point of view and as a purpose, prior to it: positive law must guarantee the satisfaction of fundamental human demands.

389
389. The political community tends to the common good when it acts in favor of the creation of a human environment in which citizens are offered the possibility of the real exercise of human rights and the full fulfillment of their respective duties: "In fact, experience teaches that, when there is a lack of appropriate action by the public powers in the economic, political or cultural sphere, a greater number of inequalities occur among citizens, especially in our time, in increasingly broader sectors, thus resulting in the rights and duties of the human person lacking all practical efficiency.

390
390. The profound meaning of civil and political coexistence does not immediately emerge from the list of individual rights and duties. This coexistence takes on all its meaning if it is based on civil friendship and fraternity. The field of law, in effect, is that of the protection of interest and external respect, that of the protection of material goods and their distribution according to established rules. The field of friendship, on the contrary, is that of selflessness, detachment from material goods, donation, inner availability to the demands of the other. Civil friendship, understood in this way, is the most authentic performance of the principle of fraternity, which is inseparable from those of freedom and equality. This is a principle that has largely remained unpracticed in modern and contemporary political societies, especially due to the influence exerted by individualist and collectivist ideologies.

391
391. A community is solidly founded when it tends to the integral promotion of the person and the common good. In this case, the right is defined, respected and also lived according to the modalities of solidarity and dedication to others. Justice requires that each person be able to enjoy their own goods, their own rights, and can be considered the minimum measure of love. Coexistence is all the more human the more it is characterized by the effort towards a more mature awareness of the ideal towards which it must tend, which is the "civilization of love."

392
392. The evangelical precept of charity enlightens Christians about the deepest meaning of political coexistence. The best way to make it truly human "is to foster the inner sense of justice, benevolence and service to the common good and to strengthen the fundamental convictions regarding the true nature of the political community and the end, correct exercise and limits of public powers." The objective that believers must set for themselves is the realization of community relationships between people. The Christian vision of political society gives maximum importance to the value of the community, either as an organizational model of coexistence or as a daily lifestyle.

393
393. The Church has been confronted with various conceptions of authority, always taking care to defend and propose a model based on the social nature of people: «In fact, since God has created men social by nature and no society can be preserved without a supreme leader who moves each and every one with the same effective impulse, aimed at the common good, an authority is necessary in every human society to direct it; an authority that, like society itself, arises and derives from nature, and, therefore, from God himself, who is its author. Political authority is therefore necessary, due to the tasks assigned to it and must be a positive and irreplaceable component of civil coexistence.

394
394. The political authority must guarantee the orderly and upright life of the community, without supplanting the free activity of individuals and groups, but rather disciplining it and directing it towards the realization of the common good, respecting and protecting the independence of individual and social subjects. Political authority is the instrument of coordination and direction through which individuals and intermediate bodies must orient themselves towards an order whose relationships, institutions and procedures are at the service of integral human growth. The exercise of political authority, in fact, "both in the community as such and in representative institutions, must always be carried out within the limits of the moral order to pursue the common good - dynamically conceived - according to the legal order legitimately established or to be established." It is then that citizens are obliged in conscience to obey.

395
395. The subject of political authority is the people, considered in their entirety as holders of sovereignty. The people transfer in various ways the exercise of their sovereignty to those they freely choose as their representatives, but retain the power to exercise it in controlling the actions of the rulers and also in replacing them, in the event that they do not satisfactorily fulfill their functions. Although this is a valid right in every State and in any political regime, the system of democracy, thanks to its control procedures, allows and guarantees its best performance. Popular consensus alone, however, is not enough to consider the modalities of the exercise of political authority fair.

396
396. Authority must be guided by the moral law: all its dignity derives from exercising it within the scope of the moral order, "which has God as its first beginning and last end." Due to the necessary reference to this order, which precedes and founds it, its purposes and recipients, authority cannot be understood as a force determined by criteria of a purely sociological and historical nature: "There are, in fact, those who dare to deny the existence of an objective moral law, superior to external reality and man himself, absolutely necessary and universal and, finally, equal for all. For this reason, since men do not recognize a single law of justice with universal value, they cannot reach a full and secure agreement on anything. In this order, "if the idea of ​​God is denied, these precepts necessarily disintegrate completely." Precisely from this order come the force that authority has to bind and its moral legitimacy; not of discretion or the will to power, and has the duty to translate this order into concrete actions to achieve the common good.

397
397. The authority must recognize, respect and promote essential human and moral values. These are innate, «they derive from the very truth of the human being and express and protect the dignity of the person. They are values, therefore, that no individual, no majority and no State can ever create, modify or destroy. These values ​​are not based on "majorities" of opinion, provisional and changeable, but must simply be recognized, respected and promoted as elements of an objective moral law, a natural law inscribed in the heart of man ([+[0]+]), and a normative reference point of civil law itself. If, due to a tragic obscuration of the collective conscience, skepticism managed to cast doubt on the fundamental principles of the moral law, the state order itself would be stripped of its foundations, reduced to a pure mechanism of pragmatic regulation of diverse and conflicting interests.

398
398. Authority must issue just laws, that is, in accordance with the dignity of the human person and the dictates of right reason: "While human law is such insofar as it is in accordance with right reason and therefore derives from eternal law." When, on the other hand, a law is in contrast to reason, it is called an iniquitous law; In that case it ceases to be law and becomes rather an act of violence. The authority that governs according to reason places the citizen in a relationship not so much of submission to another man, but rather of obedience to the moral order and, therefore, to God himself who is its ultimate source. Whoever refuses to obey the authority that acts according to the moral order "rebells against the divine order" ([+[0]+]). Similarly, public authority, which has its foundation in human nature and belongs to the order pre-established by God, if it does not act in order to the common good, it neglects its own end and therefore becomes illegitimate.

399
399. The citizen is not obliged in conscience to follow the prescriptions of the civil authorities if they are contrary to the demands of the moral order, the fundamental rights of people or the teachings of the Gospel. Unjust laws place morally upright people facing dramatic problems of conscience: when they are called to collaborate in morally illicit actions, they have the obligation to refuse. In addition to being a moral duty, this rejection is also an elementary human right that, precisely because it is such, civil law itself must recognize and protect: "Whoever resorts to conscientious objection must be safe not only from criminal sanctions, but also from any harm on a legal, disciplinary, economic and professional level."

400
400. Recognizing that natural law founds and limits positive law means admitting that it is legitimate to resist authority in the event that it seriously and repeatedly violates the principles of natural law. Saint Thomas Aquinas writes that "one is obliged to obey... because the order of justice demands it." The foundation of the right of resistance is, therefore, the right of nature.

401
401. Social doctrine indicates the criteria for the exercise of the right of resistance: «Resistance to the oppression of those who govern cannot legitimately resort to weapons except when the following conditions are met: 1) in the case of certain, serious and prolonged violations of fundamental rights; 2) after all other remedies have been exhausted; 3) without causing worse disorders; 4) that there is a well-founded hope of success; 5) if it is impossible to reasonably foresee better solutions. Armed struggle must be considered an extreme remedy to put an end to a "evident and prolonged tyranny that seriously violates the fundamental rights of the person and dangerously damages the common good of the country." The seriousness of the dangers that resorting to violence entails today shows that the path of passive resistance is always preferable, "more in accordance with moral principles and no less promising for success."

402
402. To protect the common good, the legitimate public authority has the right and duty to impose penalties proportionate to the seriousness of the crimes. The State has the double task of repressing behavior that is harmful to human rights and the fundamental rules of civil coexistence, and to remedy, through the system of penalties, the disorder caused by criminal action. In the Rule of Law, the power to inflict penalties is rightly entrusted to the Judiciary: "The Constitutions of modern States, by defining the relationships that must exist between the legislative, executive and judicial powers, guarantee the latter the necessary independence in the field of law."

403
403. Punishment does not serve only to defend public order and guarantee the safety of people; This also becomes an instrument of correction of the guilty, a correction that also assumes the moral value of expiation when the guilty voluntarily accepts his punishment. Its purpose is twofold: on the one hand, to promote the reintegration of convicted people; On the other hand, promote a reconciliatory justice, capable of restoring the relationships of harmonious coexistence broken by the criminal act.

404
404. The activity of the entities in charge of investigating criminal responsibility, which is always of a personal nature, must tend towards the rigorous search for the truth and must be carried out with full respect for the dignity and rights of the human person: it is about guaranteeing the rights of both the guilty and the innocent. The general legal principle must always be kept in mind on the basis of which a penalty cannot be applied if the crime has not been proven first.

405
405. The Church sees as a sign of hope "the increasingly widespread aversion in public opinion to the death penalty, even as an instrument of social "legitimate defense", when considering the possibilities that a modern society has to effectively repress crime so that, by neutralizing the person who has committed it, he is not definitively deprived of the possibility of redemption. " Even though the traditional teaching of the Church does not exclude - assuming full verification of the identity and responsibility of the guilty party - the death penalty "if this were the only possible way to effectively defend human lives from the unjust aggressor", bloodless methods of repression and punishment are preferable, since "they correspond better to the concrete conditions of the common good and are more in accordance with the dignity of the human person." The growing number of countries adopting provisions to abolish the death penalty or to suspend its application is also proof that cases in which it is absolutely necessary to eliminate the prisoner "are now very rare, if not practically non-existent." The growing aversion of public opinion to the death penalty and the various provisions that tend towards its abolition or suspension of its application, constitute visible manifestations of greater moral sensitivity.

406
406. An explicit and articulated judgment on democracy is contained in the encyclical "Centesimus annus": "The Church appreciates the system of democracy, to the extent that it ensures the participation of citizens in political choices and guarantees the governed the possibility of choosing and controlling their own rulers, or of replacing them in a timely manner in a peaceful manner. For this reason, it cannot favor the formation of restricted leading groups that, for particular interests or ideological reasons, usurp the power of the State. An authentic democracy is possible only in a rule of law and on the basis of a right conception of the human person. It requires that the necessary conditions be met for the promotion of specific people, through education and training in true ideals, as well as the “subjectivity” of society through the creation of structures of participation and co-responsibility.

407
407. An authentic democracy is not only the result of formal respect for the rules, but is the fruit of the convinced acceptance of the values that inspire democratic procedures: the dignity of every human person, respect for human rights, the assumption of the "common good" as the goal and regulatory criterion of political life. If there is no general consensus on these values, the meaning of democracy is lost and its stability is compromised.

408
408. The Magisterium recognizes the validity of the principle of the division of powers in a State: «It is preferable that a power be balanced by other powers and other spheres of competence, which keep it within its just limit. This is the principle of the “rule of law”, in which the law and not the arbitrary will of men is sovereign.

409
409. In their specific field ([+[0]+]), those elected must commit themselves to the search and action of what can help the proper functioning of civil coexistence as a whole. The obligation of rulers to respond to the governed does not imply in any way that representatives are simple passive agents of the voters. The control exercised by citizens, in fact, does not exclude the necessary freedom that elected officials have, in the exercise of their mandate, in relation to the objectives that must be proposed: these do not depend exclusively on the interests of one party, but to a much greater extent on the function of synthesis and mediation in view of the common good, which constitutes one of the essential and inalienable purposes of political authority.

410
410. Those with political responsibilities should not forget or underestimate the moral dimension of representation, which consists of the commitment to share the destiny of the people and to seek solutions to social problems. In this perspective, a responsible authority also means an authority exercised through recourse to the virtues that favor the practice of power in a spirit of service ( [+[0]+] ); an authority exercised by people capable of authentically assuming the common good as the purpose of their actions and not prestige or the achievement of personal advantages.

411
411. Among the deformations of the democratic system, political corruption is one of the most serious because it betrays both the principles of morality and the norms of social justice; it compromises the proper functioning of the State, negatively influencing the relationship between those who govern and the governed; It introduces a growing distrust of public institutions, causing a progressive contempt among citizens for politics and their representatives, with the consequent weakening of institutions. Corruption fundamentally distorts the role of representative institutions, because it uses them as a terrain for political exchange between clientelistic requests and benefits from the rulers. In this way, political options favor the limited objectives of those who have the means to influence them and prevent the realization of the common good of all citizens.

412
412. Public administration, at any level—national, regional, municipal—, as an instrument of the State, has the purpose of serving citizens: "The State, at the service of citizens, is the manager of the people's assets, which it must administer in view of the common good." This perspective is opposed to excessive bureaucratization, which occurs when "institutions, becoming complex in their organization and attempting to manage every area at their disposal, end up being brought down by impersonal functionalism, by exaggerated bureaucracy, by unjust private interests, by the easy and general shrug of the shoulders." The role of those who work in the public administration must not be conceived as something impersonal and bureaucratic, but as caring help to the citizen, exercised in a spirit of service.

413
413. Political parties have the task of promoting broad participation and access for all to public responsibilities. Parties are called to interpret the aspirations of civil society, directing them towards the common good, offering citizens the effective possibility of participating in the formation of political options. Parties must be democratic in their internal structure, capable of political synthesis and with a vision of the future.

414
414. Information is among the main instruments of democratic participation. Participation is unthinkable without knowledge of the problems of the political community, of the factual data and of the various proposed solutions. It is necessary to ensure real pluralism in this delicate area of ​​social life, guaranteeing a multiplicity of forms and instruments in the field of information and communication, and facilitating conditions of equality in the possession and use of these instruments through appropriate laws. Among the obstacles that stand in the way of the full realization of the right to objectivity in information, the phenomenon of editorial and television concentrations deserves particular attention, with dangerous effects on the entire democratic system when this phenomenon corresponds to increasingly closer links between government activity, financial powers and information.

415
415. The media must be used to build and sustain the human community, in the various economic, political, cultural, educational, religious sectors: «The information from these media is a service for the common good. Society has the right to information based on truth, freedom, justice and solidarity.

416
416. In the world of social media, the intrinsic difficulties of communication are frequently exacerbated by ideology, the desire for profit and political control, rivalries and conflicts between groups, and other social evils. Moral values ​​and principles also apply to the social communications sector: "The ethical dimension not only concerns the content of the communication ([+[0]+]) and the communication process ([+[1]+]), but also fundamental, structural and systematic issues, which often include multiple policy issues regarding the distribution of technology and high-quality products ([+[2]+])."

417
417. The political community is established to serve civil society, from which it derives. The Church has contributed to establishing the distinction between political community and civil society, especially with its vision of man, understood as an autonomous, relational being, open to Transcendence: this vision contrasts both with political ideologies of an individualistic nature, as well as with totalitarian ones that tend to absorb civil society in the sphere of the State. The Church's efforts in favor of social pluralism aim to achieve a more adequate realization of the common good and of democracy itself, according to the principles of solidarity, subsidiarity and justice.

418
418. The political community and civil society, even when they are reciprocally linked and interdependent, are not equal in the hierarchy of purposes. The political community is essentially at the service of civil society and, in the final analysis, of the people and groups that comprise it. Civil society, therefore, cannot be considered a mere appendix or a variable of the political community: on the contrary, it has preeminence, since it is precisely civil society that justifies the existence of the political community.

419
419. The political community must regulate its relations with civil society according to the principle of subsidiarity: it is essential that the growth of democratic life begins in the social fabric. The activities of civil society - especially volunteerism and cooperation in the private-social sphere, synthetically defined as the "third sector" to distinguish it from the spheres of the State and the market - constitute the most appropriate modalities for developing the social dimension of the person, which in such activities can find space for its full manifestation. The progressive expansion of social initiatives outside the state sphere creates new spaces for the active presence and direct action of citizens, integrating the functions developed by the State. This important phenomenon has often been carried out through informal means and instruments, giving life to new and positive modalities of exercising individual rights that qualitatively enrich democratic life.

420
420. Cooperation, even in its less structured forms, is outlined as one of the strongest responses to the logic of conflict and unlimited competition, which today appears predominant. The relationships that are established in a climate of cooperation and solidarity overcome ideological divisions, promoting the search for what unites beyond what divides.

421
421. The Second Vatican Council has committed the Catholic Church to promoting religious freedom. The Declaration "Dignitatis humanoe" specifies in the subtitle that it intends to proclaim "the right of the person and communities to social and civil freedom in religious matters." In order for this freedom, willed by God and inscribed in human nature, to be exercised, it must not be hindered, given that "the truth does not impose itself in any other way than by the force of truth itself." The dignity of the person and the very nature of the search for God demand immunity for all men from any coercion in the religious field. Society and the State should not force a person to act against his conscience, nor prevent him from acting in accordance with it. Religious freedom does not imply a moral license to adhere to error, nor an implicit right to error.

422
422. Freedom of conscience and religion "represents the individual and socially considered man." The right to religious freedom must be recognized in the legal system and sanctioned as a civil right. However, it is not in itself an unlimited right. The just limits to the exercise of religious freedom must be determined for each social situation through political prudence, according to the demands of the common good, and ratified by civil authority through legal norms in accordance with the objective moral order. They are norms required “for the effective protection, in favor of all citizens, of these rights, and for the peaceful composition of such rights; for the adequate promotion of that honest public peace, which is orderly coexistence in true justice; and for the due custody of public morality.

423
423. Due to its historical and cultural ties with a Nation, a religious community may receive special recognition from the State: this recognition must not, in any way, generate civil or social discrimination with respect to other religious groups. The vision of relations between States and religious organizations, promoted by the Second Vatican Council, corresponds to the demands of the rule of law and the norms of international law. The Church is perfectly aware that not everyone shares this vision: unfortunately, "many States violate this right [to religious freedom], to such an extent that giving, having catechism given or receiving it becomes a crime susceptible to sanctions."

424
424. The Church and the political community, although both express themselves with visible organizational structures, are different in nature, both in terms of their configuration and the purposes they pursue. The Second Vatican Council has solemnly reaffirmed that "the political community and the Church are independent and autonomous, each on its own terrain." The Church is organized in appropriate ways to satisfy the spiritual demands of its faithful, while the various political communities generate relationships and institutions at the service of everything that belongs to the temporal common good. The autonomy and independence of the two realities are clearly shown above all in the order of purposes.

425
425. The reciprocal autonomy of the Church and the political community does not entail such a separation that it excludes collaboration: both, although in different capacities, are at the service of the personal and social vocation of the same men. The Church and the political community, in effect, express themselves through organizational forms that do not constitute an end in themselves, but are at the service of man, to allow him the full exercise of his rights, inherent to his identity as a citizen and Christian, and a correct fulfillment of the corresponding duties. The Church and the political community can develop their service "all the more effectively, for the good of all, the better they both cultivate healthy cooperation among themselves, taking into account the circumstances of place and time."

426
426. The Church has the right to legal recognition of its own identity. Precisely because its mission encompasses the entire human reality, the Church, feeling "intimate and truly supportive of the human race and its history," claims the freedom to express its moral judgment on these realities, as often as the defense of the fundamental rights of the person or the salvation of souls requires it.

427
427. In order to prevent and mitigate possible conflicts between the Church and the political community, the legal experience of the Church and the State has outlined various stable forms of relationship and instruments suitable for guaranteeing harmonious relations. This experience is an essential point of reference for cases in which the State intends to invade the field of action of the Church, hindering its free activity, even to the point of openly persecuting it or, vice versa, in cases in which ecclesial organizations do not act correctly with respect to the State.

428
428. The biblical narratives about the origins show the unity of the human race and teach that the God of Israel is the Lord of history and the cosmos: his action encompasses the entire world and the entire human family, for which the work of creation is destined. God's decision to make man in his image and likeness ( [+[0]+] ) confers on the human creature a unique dignity, which extends to all generations ( [+[1]+] ) and over the entire earth ( [+[2]+] ). The book of Genesis also shows that the human being has not been created in isolation, but within a context of which the vital space is an integral part, which ensures freedom ( [+[3]+] ), the availability of food ( [+[4]+] ), work ( [+[5]+] ) and above all the community ( [+[6]+] ) ( [+[7]+] ). The conditions that ensure plenitude to human life are, throughout the Old Testament, the object of divine blessing. God wants to guarantee man the goods necessary for his growth, the possibility of expressing himself freely, the positive result of work, the richness of relationships between similar beings.

429
429. God's alliance with Noah ( [+[0]+] ), and in him with all humanity, after the destruction caused by the flood, manifests that God wants to maintain for the human community the blessing of fertility, the task of dominating creation and the absolute dignity and intangibility of human life that had characterized the first creation, despite the fact that the degeneration of violence and injustice, punished with the flood, has been introduced into it with sin. The book of Genesis presents with admiration the variety of peoples, the work of God's creative action ([+[1]+]) and, at the same time, stigmatizes man's rejection of his condition as a creature, in the episode of the tower of Babel ([+[2]+]). All peoples, in the divine plan, had "the same language and identical words" ([+[3]+]), but men are divided, turning their backs on the Creator ([+[4]+]).

430
430. The alliance established by God with Abraham, chosen as "father of a multitude of peoples" ([+[0]+]), opens the way for the reunification of the human family with its Creator. The history of salvation leads the people of Israel to think that divine action is limited to their land. However, little by little, the conviction that God also acts among other Nations is being consolidated ( [+[1]+] ). The Prophets will announce for the eschatological time the pilgrimage of the people to the temple of the Lord and an era of peace among the Nations ( [+[2]+] ). Israel, dispersed in exile, will definitively become aware of its role as witness of the only God ([+[3]+]), Lord of the world and the history of peoples ([+[4]+]).

431
431. The Lord Jesus is the prototype and foundation of the new humanity. In Him, the true "image of God" ([+[0]+]), man created by God in his image finds his fulfillment. In the definitive testimony of love that God has manifested in the Cross of Christ, all barriers of enmity have been torn down ( [+[1]+] ) and for those who live the new life in Christ, racial and cultural differences are no longer a reason for division ( [+[2]+] ).

432
432. The Christian message offers a universal vision of the life of men and peoples on earth, which makes us understand the unity of the human family. This unity is not built by force of arms, terror or arrogance; It is rather the result of that "supreme model of unity, a reflection of the intimate life of God, One in three persons... that we Christians express with the word "communion"", and a conquest of the moral and cultural force of freedom. The Christian message has been decisive in making humanity understand that people tend to unite not only due to forms of organization, political vicissitudes, economic projects or in the name of an abstract and ideological internationalism, but because they freely orient themselves towards cooperation, conscious of "belonging as living members to the great world community." The world community must propose itself more and better as a concrete figure of the unity desired by the Creator: «No era will be able to erase the social unity of men, since it consists of individuals who possess the same natural dignity with equal rights. For this reason, it will always be necessary, due to imperatives of the same nature, to duly attend to the universal good, that is, that which affects the entire human family.

433
433. The centrality of the human person and the natural tendency of people and peoples to strengthen relationships among themselves are the fundamental elements to build a true International Community, whose organization must be oriented towards the effective universal common good. Although the aspiration towards an authentic international community is widely spread, the unity of the human family has not yet found fulfillment, since it is hindered by materialist and nationalist ideologies that deny the values ​​of the person considered integrally, in all its dimensions, material and spiritual, individual and community. In particular, any theory or behavior inspired by racism and racial discrimination is morally unacceptable.

434
434. Law is presented as an instrument of guarantee of international order, that is, of coexistence between political communities that individually seek the common good of their citizens and that collectively must tend to that of all peoples, with the conviction that the common good of a Nation is inseparable from the good of the entire human family.

435
435. The Magisterium recognizes the importance of national sovereignty, conceived above all as an expression of the freedom that must regulate relations between States. Sovereignty represents the subjectivity of a Nation in its political, economic, social and cultural profile. The cultural dimension acquires a decisive value as a point of support to resist acts of aggression or forms of domination that condition the freedom of a country: culture constitutes the guarantee to preserve the identity of a people, expresses and promotes its spiritual sovereignty.

436
436. To achieve and consolidate an international order that effectively guarantees peaceful coexistence among peoples, the same moral law that governs the lives of men must also regulate relations between States: "Moral law, the observance of which must be inculcated and promoted by the public opinion of all Nations and all States with such unanimity of voice and strength that no one can dare to question it or attenuate its binding bond." It is necessary that the universal moral law, written in the heart of man, be considered effective and non-derogable as a living expression of the conscience that humanity has in common, a "grammar" capable of guiding dialogue about the future of the world.

437
437. Universal respect for the principles that inspire a "legal order of the State, which responds to the norms of morality" is a necessary condition for the stability of international life. The search for such stability has led to the gradual development of a law of nations "ius gentium", which can be considered the "ancestor of international law." Legal and theological reflection, linked to natural law, has formulated "universal principles that are prior and superior to the internal law of States", such as the unity of the human race, the equal dignity of all peoples, the rejection of war to overcome controversies, the obligation to cooperate for the common good, the requirement to maintain the agreements signed ([+[0]+]). This last principle must be especially emphasized in order to avoid "the temptation to appeal to the right of force rather than the force of law."

438
438. To resolve the conflicts that arise between the various political communities and that compromise the stability of Nations and international security, it is essential to agree on common rules derived from dialogue, definitively renouncing the idea of seeking justice through recourse to war: "War can end, without winners or losers, in a suicide of humanity; Therefore we must repudiate the logic that leads to it, the idea that the struggle for the destruction of the adversary, contradiction and war itself are factors of progress and advancement of history.

439
439. To consolidate the primacy of law, it is important above all to consolidate the principle of reciprocal trust. In this perspective, it is necessary to revamp the regulatory instruments for the peaceful resolution of disputes so that their scope and obligation are reinforced. The institutions of negotiation, mediation, conciliation and arbitration, which are an expression of international legality, must be supported by the creation of "a fully effective judicial authority in a world at peace." Progress in this direction will allow the International Community to present itself no longer as a simple moment of grouping of the life of States, but as a structure in which conflicts can be resolved peacefully: "Just as within each State ([+[0]+]) the system of private vengeance and retaliation has been replaced by the rule of law, so it is now urgent that similar progress takes place in the International Community." In short, international law "must prevent the law of the strongest from prevailing."

440
440. The Church favors the path towards an authentic international "community", which has assumed a precise direction through the institution of the United Nations Organization in 1945. This organization "has contributed significantly to promoting respect for human dignity, the freedom of peoples and the demand for development, preparing the cultural and institutional ground on which to build peace." Social doctrine, in general, considers the role of intergovernmental organizations positive, particularly those that act in specific sectors, although it has expressed reservations when they approach problems incorrectly. The Magisterium recommends that the action of international Organizations respond to human needs in social life and in relevant environments for the peaceful and orderly coexistence of Nations and peoples.

441
441. The desire to achieve an orderly and peaceful coexistence of the human family prompts the Magisterium to highlight the requirement of establishing "a universal public authority recognized by all, with effective power to guarantee security, compliance with justice and respect for rights." In the course of history, despite the changes in perspective of the various eras, the need for a similar authority to respond to the global problems presented by the search for the common good has been constantly noted: it is essential that this authority be the result of an agreement and not of an imposition, and is not understood as a "global super-state."

442
442. An international policy that tends to the objective of peace and development through the adoption of coordinated measures is more necessary than ever due to the globalization of problems. The Magisterium emphasizes that interdependence between men and between Nations acquires a moral dimension and determines the relations of today's world in the economic, cultural, political and religious spheres. In this context, a review of international organizations is desirable; This is a process that "supposes the overcoming of political rivalries and the renunciation of the will to instrumentalize these organizations, whose sole reason must be the common good," with the aim of achieving "a higher degree of international order."

443
443. The Magisterium positively values ​​the role of the groups that have been created in civil society to develop an important function of training and raising public opinion in the various aspects of international life, with special attention to respect for human rights, as demonstrated by "the number of private associations, some of global reach, recently created, and almost all of them committed to following international events in such a delicate field with extreme care and laudable objectivity."

444
444. The Holy See—or Apostolic See—enjoys full international subjectivity, as a sovereign authority that carries out legally proper acts. It exercises external sovereignty, recognized within the framework of the International Community, which reflects that exercised within the Church and is characterized by organizational unity and independence. The Church uses legal modalities that are necessary or useful for the performance of its mission.

445
445. The diplomatic service of the Holy See, the fruit of an ancient and consolidated praxis, is an instrument that acts not only for the "libertas Ecclesiae", but also for the defense and promotion of human dignity, as well as to establish a social order based on the values of justice, truth, freedom and love: "By a native right inherent to our own spiritual mission, favored by a secular development of historical events, We also send our legacies to the supreme authorities of the States in which the Catholic Church is located or present in some way. It is true that the purposes of the Church and the State are of a different order, and that both are perfect societies, endowed, therefore, with their own means, and are independent in their own sphere of action; But it is also true that both act for the benefit of a common subject, man, called by God to eternal salvation and placed on earth to allow him, with the help of grace, to obtain it through a life of work, which provides him well-being in a peaceful coexistence. The good of individuals and human communities is favored when there is a constructive and articulate dialogue between the Church and civil authorities, which is also expressed through the stipulation of reciprocal agreements. This dialogue tends to establish or strengthen relationships of reciprocal understanding and collaboration, as well as to prevent or heal eventual tensions, in order to contribute to the progress of each people and all of humanity in justice and peace.

446
446. The solution to the problem of development requires cooperation between particular political communities: «The Nations, finding themselves in need of some complementary aid and others of further improvement, will only be able to attend to their own usefulness while simultaneously looking to the benefit of others. Therefore it is absolutely necessary that the States understand each other well and provide mutual aid." Underdevelopment seems to be a situation that is impossible to eliminate, almost a fatal sentence, if one considers that it is not only the result of wrong human decisions, but also the result of "economic, financial and social mechanisms" and "structures of sin" that prevent the full development of men and peoples.

447
447. Social doctrine induces forms of cooperation capable of encouraging access to the international market of countries marked by poverty and underdevelopment: «In recent years it has been stated that the development of the poorest countries depended on isolation from the world market, as well as on their exclusive confidence in their own forces. Recent history has revealed that countries that have been marginalized have experienced stagnation and regression; On the other hand, countries that have managed to enter the general interrelation of economic activities at the international level have experienced development. It seems, therefore, that the biggest problem is achieving equitable access to the international market, based not on the unilateral principle of the exploitation of natural resources, but on the valuation of human resources. Among the causes that most contribute to determining underdevelopment and poverty, in addition to the impossibility of accessing the international market, are illiteracy, nutritional difficulties, the absence of structures and services, the lack of measures that guarantee basic assistance in the field of health, the lack of drinking water, corruption, the precariousness of institutions and political life itself. There is, in many countries, a connection between poverty and the lack of freedom, of possibilities for economic initiative, of state administration capable of predisposing an adequate education and information system.

448
448. The spirit of international cooperation requires that, above the narrow logic of the market, awareness of the duty of solidarity, social justice and universal charity be developed, because there is "something that is due to man because he is man, by virtue of his eminent dignity." Cooperation is the path in which the International Community as a whole must commit itself and follow "according to an adequate conception of the common good with reference to the entire human family." Very positive effects will derive from it, for example, an increase in confidence in the potential of poor people and, therefore, of poor countries, and an equitable distribution of goods.

449
449. At the beginning of the new millennium, the poverty of billions of men and women is "the question that, more than any other, challenges our human and Christian conscience." Poverty manifests a dramatic problem of justice: poverty, in its various forms and consequences, is characterized by unequal growth and does not recognize each people's "equal right to sit at the common banquet table." This poverty makes impossible the realization of that full humanism that the Church sponsors and proposes, so that people and peoples can "be more" and live in "more human conditions."

450
450. The right to development must be taken into account in issues linked to the debt crisis in many poor countries. This crisis has at its origin complex causes of a diverse nature, both international in nature (exchange fluctuations, financial speculation, economic neocolonialism) and internal to the indebted countries (corruption, mismanagement of public money, distorted use of the loans received). The greatest suffering, attributable to structural issues but also to personal behavior, falls on the population of indebted and poor countries, through no fault of their own. The international community cannot ignore such a situation: even reaffirming the principle that the debt acquired must be paid off, it is necessary to find ways to avoid compromising the "fundamental right of people to subsistence and progress."

451
451. The living experience of the divine presence in history is the foundation of the faith of the people of God: "We were slaves of Pharaoh of Egypt, and Yahweh brought us out of Egypt with a strong hand" ([+[0]+]). Reflection on history allows us to resume the past and discover the work of God from its roots: "My Father was a wandering Aramean" ([+[1]+]). A God who can say to his people: "I took your father Abraham from the other side of the River" ([+[2]+]). It is a reflection that allows us to look confidently to the future, thanks to the promise and alliance that God continually renews.

452
452. Man's relationship with the world is a constitutive element of human identity. It is a relationship that is born as a fruit of the even deeper union of man with God. The Lord has wanted the human person as his interlocutor: only in dialogue with God does the human creature find his own truth, in which he finds inspiration and norms to project the future of the world, a garden that God has given him to be cultivated and guarded ( [+[0]+] ). Not even sin suppresses this mission, even when it has marked the nobility of the work with pain and suffering ([+[1]+]).

453
453. The definitive salvation that God offers to all humanity through his own Son is not realized outside of this world. Even wounded by sin, the world is destined to experience a radical purification ([+[0]+]) from which it will emerge renewed ([+[1]+]), finally becoming the place where justice stably "dwells" ([+[2]+]).

454
454. The entry of Jesus Christ into the history of the world culminates in Easter, where nature itself participates in the drama of the rejected Son of God and the victory of the Resurrection ( [+[0]+] ). Going through death and grafting into it the resplendent newness of the Resurrection, Jesus inaugurates a new world in which everything is submitted to Him ( [+[1]+] ) and reestablishes the relationships of order and harmony that sin had destroyed. The awareness of the imbalances between man and nature must be accompanied by the conviction that in Jesus the reconciliation of man and the world with God has been achieved, in such a way that the human being, aware of divine love, can rediscover the lost peace: « Therefore, he who is in Christ is a new creation; The old is gone, everything is new » ( [+[2]+] ). Nature, which had been created in the Word, through the same Word made flesh, has been reconciled with God and pacified ( [+[3]+] ).

455
455. Not only has man's interiority been healed, his corporeality has also been elevated by the redeeming power of Christ; The entire creation takes part in the renewal that springs from the Lord's Passover, even groaning in labor pains ([+[0]+]), waiting to give birth to "a new heaven and a new earth" ([+[1]+]) which are the gift of the end of times, of salvation fulfilled. Meanwhile, nothing is foreign to this salvation: in any condition of life, the Christian is called to serve Christ, to live according to his Spirit, allowing himself to be guided by love, the beginning of a new life, which brings the world and man to the project of his origins: «The world, life, death, the present, the future, everything is yours; and you, of Christ, and Christ, of God » ( [+[2]+] ).

456
456. The biblical vision inspires the attitudes of Christians regarding the use of the land, and the development of science and technology. The Second Vatican Council declares that "man, a participant in the light of divine intelligence, is right when he affirms that by virtue of his intelligence he is superior to the material universe." The Council Fathers recognize the progress made thanks to the incessant application of human ingenuity throughout the centuries, in the empirical sciences, in technology and in the liberal disciplines. Man "in our days, thanks to science and technology, has managed to expand and continues to expand the field of his dominion over almost all of nature."

457
457. The results of science and technology are, in themselves, positive: Christians "far from thinking that the conquests achieved by man are opposed to the power of God and that the rational creature seeks to rival the Creator, they are, on the contrary, convinced that man's victories are a sign of the greatness of God and a consequence of his ineffable plan." The Council Fathers also emphasize the fact that "the more man's power increases, the broader is his individual and collective responsibility," and that all human activity must be directed, according to God's plan and his will, for the good of humanity. In this perspective, the Magisterium has frequently stressed that the Catholic Church is in no way opposed to progress, on the contrary, it considers "science and technology... a wonderful product of human creativity gifted by God, they have provided us with wonderful possibilities and we have gratefully benefited from them." For this reason, "as believers in God, who has judged the nature created by Him to be "good", we enjoy the technical and economic progress that man with his intelligence manages to achieve."

458
458. The considerations of the Magisterium on science and technology in general also extend to their applications to the environment and agriculture. The Church appreciates "the advantages that result—and that may still result—from the study and applications of molecular biology, complemented by other disciplines, such as genetics, and its technological application in agriculture and industry." In fact, "the technique could become, if correctly applied, a valuable instrument to solve serious problems, starting with hunger and disease, through the production of more advanced and resistant varieties of plants and very useful medicines." It is important, however, to reaffirm the concept of "right application", because "we know that this potential is not neutral: it can be used both for the progress of man and for his degradation." For this reason, "it is necessary to maintain an attitude of prudence and analyze with a careful eye the nature, purpose and methods of the various forms of applied technology." Scientists, therefore, must "truly use their research and technical capacity for the service of humanity," knowing how to subordinate them "to the moral principles that respect and fully realize the dignity of man."

459
459. The central point of reference for all scientific and technical applications is respect for man, which must be accompanied by a necessary attitude of respect towards other living creatures. Even when an alteration of these is proposed, "it is advisable to take into account the nature of each being and their mutual connection in an ordered system." In this sense, the formidable possibilities of biological research raise deep concern, since "it has not yet been possible to calculate the alterations caused in nature by indiscriminate genetic manipulation and by the thoughtless development of new species of plants and forms of animal life, not to mention unacceptable interventions on the origins of human life itself." In fact, "it has been found that the application of some discoveries in the industrial and agricultural field produces, in the long term, negative effects." All this has crudely demonstrated how any intervention in one area of ​​the ecosystem must consider its consequences in other areas and, in general, in the well-being of future generations.

460
460. Man, therefore, must not forget that "his capacity to transform and, in a certain sense, to "create" the world with his own work... is always developed on the basis of the first and original gift of things by God." He must not "arbitrarily dispose of the earth, subjecting it without reservation to his will, as if it did not have its own physiognomy and a previous destiny given by God, and which man can certainly develop, but which he must not betray." When he behaves in this way, "instead of playing his role as God's collaborator in the work of creation, man supplants God and thereby provokes the rebellion of nature, which is rather tyrannized than governed by him."

461
461. The biblical message and the Magisterium of the Church constitute the essential points of reference for assessing the problems that arise in the relationships between man and the environment. At the origin of these problems we can perceive the pretension to exercise absolute control over things by man, a man indifferent to the moral considerations that must characterize all human activity.

462
462. Nature appears as an instrument in the hands of man, a reality that he must constantly manipulate, especially through technology. Based on the assumption, which has proven to be erroneous, that there is an unlimited amount of energy and usable resources, that their immediate regeneration is possible and that the negative effects of the manipulations of nature can be easily absorbed, a reductive conception that understands the natural world in a mechanistic key and development in a consumerist key has spread and prevails. The primacy attributed to doing and having rather than being is the cause of serious forms of human alienation.

463
463. A correct conception of the environment, if on the one hand it cannot utilitarianly reduce nature to a mere object of manipulation and exploitation, on the other hand, it should not absolutize it and place it, in dignity, above the human person himself. In the latter case, nature or the earth is deified, as can easily be seen in some environmental movements that ask for internationally guaranteed institutional recognition to be granted to their ideas.

464
464. A vision of man and things detached from any reference to transcendence has led to rejecting the concept of creation and attributing to man and nature a completely autonomous existence. The link that unites the world with God has thus been broken: this break has also ended up disconnecting man from the earth and, more radically, has impoverished his very identity. Human beings have come to consider themselves strange to the environmental context in which they live. The consequence that derives from all this is very clear: «The relationship that man has with God determines the relationship of man with his fellow men and with his environment. That is why Christian culture has always recognized in the creatures that surround man many other gifts from God that must be cultivated and guarded with a sense of gratitude towards the Creator. In particular, Benedictine and Franciscan spirituality have witnessed this kind of kinship of man with the environment, nurturing in him an attitude of respect for all reality of the world that surrounds him. The deep connection between environmental ecology and "human ecology" must be given greater emphasis.

465
465. The Magisterium emphasizes the human responsibility to preserve an integral and healthy environment for all: «Today's humanity, if it manages to combine new scientific capabilities with a strong ethical dimension, will certainly be capable of promoting the environment as a home and as a resource, in favor of man and all men; to eliminate pollution factors; and to ensure conditions of adequate hygiene and health for both small groups and large human settlements. The technology that pollutes can also decontaminate; The production that accumulates can also be distributed equitably, provided that the ethics of respect for life, the dignity of man and the rights of present and future human generations prevail.

466
466. The protection of the environment constitutes a challenge for all of humanity: it is about the common and universal duty to respect a collective good, intended for everyone, preventing "the various categories of beings, living or inanimate - animals, plants, natural elements - from being used with impunity - as one wishes best, according to one's own needs." It is a responsibility that must grow, taking into account the global nature of the current ecological crisis and the consequent need to face it globally, since all beings depend on each other in the universal order established by the Creator: "It is important to take into account the nature of each being and their mutual connection in an ordered system, which is precisely the cosmos."

467
467. The responsibility to safeguard the environment, the common heritage of the human race, extends not only to the demands of the present, but also to those of the future: "Inheritors of past generations and benefiting from the work of our contemporaries, we are obliged to all and cannot be disinterested in those who will come to further increase the circle of the human family. Universal solidarity, which is a fact and a benefit for everyone, is also a duty. This is a responsibility that present generations have with respect to future ones, a responsibility that also falls on each State and the International Community.

468
468. Responsibility regarding the environment must find an adequate translation in the legal field. It is important that the International Community develop uniform rules, so that this regulation allows States to more effectively control the various activities that determine negative effects on the environment and preserve ecosystems, preventing possible incidents: "It is up to each State, within its own territory, to prevent the deterioration of the atmosphere and the biosphere, carefully controlling, among other things, the effects of new technological or scientific discoveries, and offering its citizens the guarantee of not being exposed to agents." pollutants or toxic waste.

469
469. Authorities called upon to make decisions to address risks to health and the environment often find themselves faced with situations in which the available scientific data is contradictory or quantitatively scarce: it may then be appropriate to make an assessment according to the "precautionary principle", which does not entail the application of a rule, but rather a guideline for managing situations of uncertainty. This principle shows the need to make a provisional decision, which may be modified based on new knowledge that is eventually achieved. The decision must be proportionate to the measures already in place for other risks. Preventive policies, based on the precautionary principle, require that decisions be based on a comparison between the hypothetical risks and benefits of each possible alternative decision, including the decision not to intervene. Linked to this precautionary approach is the need to seriously promote the acquisition of deeper knowledge, even knowing that science may not quickly reach the conclusion of an absence of risks. The circumstances of uncertainty and provisionality make transparency in the decision-making process especially important.

470
470. Economic development programming must carefully consider "the need to respect the integrity and rhythms of nature", because natural resources are limited and some are non-renewable. The current pace of exploitation seriously threatens the availability of some natural resources for the present and the future. The solution to the ecological problem requires that economic activity better respects the environment, reconciling the demands of economic development with those of environmental protection. Any economic activity that uses natural resources must also be concerned with safeguarding the environment and foresee its costs, which must be considered as "an essential element of the current cost of economic activity." In this context, the relationships between human activity and climate changes must be considered, which, due to their extreme complexity, must be timely and constantly monitored at the scientific, political and legal, national and international levels. The climate is an asset that must be protected and requires that consumers and agents of industrial activities develop a greater sense of responsibility in their behavior.

471
471. The relationship that indigenous peoples have with their land and resources deserves special consideration: it is a fundamental expression of their identity. Many peoples have lost or are at risk of losing the lands on which they live, to which the meaning of their existence is linked, due to powerful agricultural and industrial interests, or conditioned by processes of assimilation and urbanization. The rights of indigenous peoples must be protected in a timely manner. These people offer an example of life in harmony with the environment, which they have learned to know and preserve: their extraordinary experience, which is an irreplaceable wealth for all humanity, is in danger of being lost along with the environment in which it emerged.

472
472. In recent years, the issue of the use of new biotechnologies for purposes linked to agriculture, animal husbandry, medicine and environmental protection has been strongly imposed. The new possibilities offered by current biological and biogenetic techniques arouse, on the one hand, hope and enthusiasm and, on the other, alarm and hostility. The applications of biotechnologies, their legality from a moral point of view, their consequences for human health, their impact on the environment and the economy, are the subject of in-depth study and lively debate. These are controversial issues that affect scientists and researchers, politicians and legislators, economists and environmentalists, producers and consumers. Christians are not indifferent to these problems, aware of the importance of the values ​​at stake.

473
473. The Christian vision of creation entails a positive judgment on the legality of man's interventions in nature, without excluding other living beings, and, at the same time, entails a strong call to a sense of responsibility. Nature, in fact, is not a sacred or divine reality, closed to human action. It is, rather, a gift given by the Creator to the human community, entrusted to the intelligence and moral responsibility of man. Therefore, man does not commit an illicit act when, respecting the order, beauty and usefulness of each living being and its function in the ecosystem, he intervenes in modifying some of their characteristics and properties. Although human interventions that damage living beings or the environment are deplorable, those that result in their improvement are commendable. The legality of the use of biological and biogenetic techniques does not exhaust all the ethical problems: as in any human behavior, it is necessary to carefully assess their real usefulness and their possible consequences, also in terms of risk. In the field of technical-scientific interventions that have a broad and profound impact on living organisms, with the possibility of notable long-term consequences, it is not legal to act irresponsibly or lightly.

474
474. Modern biotechnologies have a strong social, economic and political impact, at the local, national and international levels: they must be assessed according to the ethical criteria that must always guide activities and human relations in the socio-economic and political sphere. It is necessary to keep in mind, above all, the criteria of justice and solidarity, to which, first of all, individuals and groups working in research and commercialization in the field of biotechnologies must adhere. In any case, one should not make the mistake of believing that the mere dissemination of the benefits linked to new biotechnologies can solve all the pressing problems of poverty and underdevelopment that still subjugate so many countries in the world.

475
475. In the spirit of international solidarity, various measures related to the use of new biotechnologies can be put into practice. First of all, equitable commercial exchange must be facilitated, free of unfair ties. However, the promotion of the development of the most needy people will not be authentic and effective if it is reduced to the mere exchange of products. It is also essential to promote the maturation of a necessary scientific and technological autonomy on the part of these same peoples, promoting the exchange of scientific and technological knowledge and the transfer of technologies to developing countries.

476
476. Solidarity also implies a call for the responsibility of developing countries and, particularly their political authorities, in promoting a trade policy favorable to their people and the exchange of technologies that can improve their food and health conditions. In these countries, investment in research must increase, with special attention to the characteristics and particular needs of the territory itself and the population itself, especially taking into account that some potentially beneficial research in the field of biotechnologies requires relatively modest investments. To this end, it would be useful to create national organizations dedicated to the protection of the common good through intelligent risk management.

477
477. Scientists and technicians operating in the biotechnology sector must work with intelligence and perseverance in the search for the best solutions to the serious and urgent problems of food and health. They must not forget that their activities concern materials, living or inanimate, which are part of the heritage of humanity, also intended for future generations; For believers, it is a gift received from the Creator, entrusted to human intelligence and freedom, which are also a gift from the Almighty. Scientists must know how to commit their energies and abilities to passionate research, guided by a clean and honest conscience.

478
478. Entrepreneurs and those responsible for public entities that deal with research, production and trade of products derived from new biotechnologies must take into account not only the legitimate benefit, but also the common good. This principle, which applies to all economic activities, is particularly important when it comes to activities related to food, medicine, environmental protection and health care. Entrepreneurs and those responsible for interested public entities can guide, with their decisions, the biotechnology sector towards goals with a significant impact in terms of the fight against hunger, especially in the poorest countries, the fight against diseases and the fight to safeguard the ecosystem, everyone's heritage.

479
479. Politicians, legislators and public administrators have the responsibility of assessing the potential, advantages and possible risks linked to the use of biotechnologies. It is unacceptable that their decisions, at national or international level, are dictated by pressure from particular interests. Public authorities must also promote correct information of public opinion and know how to make the most appropriate decisions for the common good.

480
480. Those responsible for information also have an important task in this area, which they must carry out with prudence and objectivity. Society expects from them complete and objective information that helps citizens form a correct opinion about biotechnological products, because it is something that concerns them in the first person, as potential consumers. We must avoid, therefore, falling into the temptation of superficial information, fueled by easy enthusiasm or unjustified alarmism.

481
481. Also in the field of ecology, social doctrine invites us to keep in mind that the goods of the earth have been created by God to be wisely used by all: these goods must be equitably shared, according to justice and charity. It is fundamentally about preventing the injustice of a hoarding of resources: greed, whether individual or collective, is contrary to the order of creation. The current ecological problems, of a planetary nature, can be faced effectively only thanks to international cooperation capable of guaranteeing greater coordination in the use of the earth's resources.

482
482. The principle of the universal destination of goods offers a fundamental moral and cultural orientation to undo the complex and dramatic link that unites the environmental crisis with poverty. The current environmental crisis particularly affects the poorest, either because they live on lands subject to erosion and desertification, are involved in armed conflicts or are forced to migrate, or because they do not have the economic and technological means to protect themselves from calamities.

483
483. The close link that exists between the development of the poorest countries, demographic changes and sustainable use of the environment should not be used as a pretext for political and economic decisions that are not in accordance with the dignity of the human person. In the North of the planet there is a "fall in the birth rate, with repercussions on the aging of the population, unable even to renew itself biologically", while in the South the situation is different. While it is true that the unequal distribution of the population and available resources create obstacles to development and the sustainable use of the environment, it must be recognized that demographic growth is fully compatible with comprehensive and supportive development: "Everyone agrees that demographic policy represents only one part of a global development strategy. It is therefore important that any discussion on demographic policies takes into account the current and future development of Nations and areas. At the same time, it is impossible not to consider the true nature of what the term "development" means. Any development worthy of this name must be integral, that is, it must seek the true good of every person and of the whole person.

484
484. The principle of the universal destiny of goods, naturally, also applies to water, considered in Sacred Scripture a symbol of purification ( [+[0]+] ) and life ( [+[1]+] ): "As a gift from God, water is a vital instrument, essential for survival and, therefore, a right of all." The use of water and the services linked to it must be aimed at satisfying the needs of everyone and especially of people living in poverty. Limited access to drinking water has an impact on the well-being of an enormous number of people and is often the cause of illness, suffering, conflict, poverty and even death: to adequately resolve this issue, "it must be approached in a way that establishes moral criteria based precisely on the value of life and respect for human rights and the dignity of all human beings."

485
485. Water, by its very nature, cannot be treated as a simple commodity among others, and its use must be rational and supportive. Its distribution is traditionally part of the responsibilities of public entities, because water has always been considered a public good, a characteristic that must be maintained, even when management was entrusted to the private sector. The right to water, like all human rights, is based on human dignity and not on merely quantitative assessments, which consider water only as an economic good. Without water, life is threatened. Therefore, the right to water is a universal and inalienable right.

486
486. Serious ecological problems require an effective change of mentality that leads to the adoption of new lifestyles, "according to which the search for truth, beauty and goodness, as well as communion with other men for common development, are the elements that determine consumption, savings and investment options." Such lifestyles must be governed by sobriety, temperance, and self-discipline, both on a personal and social level. It is necessary to abandon the logic of mere consumption and promote forms of agricultural and industrial production that respect the order of creation and satisfy the primary needs of all. A similar attitude, favored by the renewed awareness of the interdependence that unites all the inhabitants of the earth, contributes to eliminating various causes of ecological disasters and guarantees a capacity for prompt response when these mishaps affect peoples and territories. The ecological question must not be faced solely because of the terrible prospects that environmental degradation portends: such a question must be, above all, a vigorous motivation to promote authentic solidarity on a global scale.

487
487. The attitude that must characterize man before creation is essentially that of gratitude and recognition: the world, in effect, orients itself towards the mystery of God, who created it and sustains it. If the relationship with God is placed in parentheses, nature loses its deep meaning, it is impoverished. On the other hand, if nature is contemplated in its creaturely dimension, a communicative relationship can be established with it, its evocative and symbolic meaning captured and thus penetrate the horizon of mystery, which opens the way for man to God, Creator of the heavens and the earth. The world is presented to man's gaze as a trace of God, a place where his creative, provident and redeeming power is revealed.

488
488. Before being a gift from God to man and a human project in accordance with the divine plan, peace is, above all, an essential attribute of God: "Yahweh-Peace" ([+[0]+]). Creation, which is a reflection of divine glory, aspires to peace. God creates all things and everything created forms a harmonious whole, good in all its parts ([+[1]+]).

489
489. In biblical Revelation, peace is much more than the simple absence of war: it represents the fullness of life ( [+[0]+] ); More than a human construction, it is a supreme divine gift offered to all men, which involves obedience to God's plan. Peace is the effect of God's blessing on his people: "Yahweh show you his face and grant you peace" ([+[1]+]). This peace generates fertility ( [+[2]+] ), well-being ( [+[3]+] ), prosperity ( [+[4]+] ), absence of fear ( [+[5]+] ) and deep joy ( [+[6]+] ).

490
490. Peace is the goal of social coexistence, as it appears in an extraordinary way in the messianic vision of peace: when all people will come to the house of the Lord and He will show them His ways, they will be able to walk the paths of peace ( [+[0]+] ). A new world of peace, reaching all of nature, has been promised for the messianic era ( [+[1]+] ) and the Messiah himself is called "Prince of Peace" ( [+[2]+] ). Where his peace reigns, where it is anticipated, even partially, no one will be able to disturb the people of God ([+[3]+]). Peace will then be lasting, because when the king rules according to the justice of God, righteousness springs forth and peace abounds "until there is no moon" ([+[4]+]). God longs to give peace to his people: "Yes, Yahweh speaks of peace for his people and for his friends, provided that they do not return to their foolishness" ([+[5]+]). The psalmist, listening to what God says to his people about peace, hears these words: "Love and Truth have met, Justice and Peace embrace each other" ([+[6]+]).

491
491. The promise of peace, which runs through the entire Old Testament, finds its fulfillment in the Person of Jesus. Peace is the messianic good par excellence, which encompasses all other salvific goods. The Hebrew word "shalom", in the etymological sense of "fortitude", expresses the concept of "peace" in the fullness of its meaning ([+[0]+]). The kingdom of the Messiah is precisely the kingdom of peace ( [+[1]+] ). Jesus "is our peace" ([+[2]+]), He has broken down the wall of enmity between men, reconciling them with God ([+[3]+]). In this way, Saint Paul, with effective simplicity, indicates the fundamental reason that drives Christians towards a life and mission of peace.

492
492. The peace of Christ is, above all, reconciliation with the Father, which is realized through the apostolic mission entrusted by Jesus to his disciples and which begins with an announcement of peace: «In the house you enter, say first: “Peace to this house”» ([+[0]+]). Peace is also reconciliation with our brothers, because Jesus, in the prayer he taught us, the "Our Father", associates the forgiveness asked of God with that which we give to our brothers: "Forgive us our debts, just as we have forgiven our debtors" ([+[1]+]). With this double reconciliation, the Christian can become an architect of peace and, therefore, a participant in the Kingdom of God, according to what Jesus himself proclaims: "Blessed are those who work for peace, for they will be called children of God" ([+[2]+]).

493
493. Action for peace is never separated from the proclamation of the Gospel, which is certainly "the Good News of peace" ([+[0]+]) addressed to all men. At the center of the "Gospel of peace" ([+[1]+]) is the mystery of the Cross, because peace is inseparable from the sacrifice of Christ ([+[2]+]): the crucified Jesus has annulled the division, establishing peace and reconciliation precisely "through the cross, giving death to Enmity in himself" ([+[3]+]) and giving men the salvation of the Resurrection.

494
494. Peace is a universal value and duty; It finds its foundation in the rational and moral order of society that has its roots in God himself, "primary source of being, essential truth and supreme good." Peace is not simply the absence of war, nor even a stable balance between adversary forces, but is based on a correct conception of the human person and requires the construction of an order according to justice and charity.

495
495. Peace is built day by day in the search for the order desired by God and can only flourish when each person recognizes their own responsibility to promote it. To prevent conflicts and violence, it is absolutely necessary that peace begins to be lived as a value within each person: this way it can extend to families and the various forms of social aggregation, until it reaches the entire political community. In a long climate of harmony and respect for justice, an authentic culture of peace can mature, capable of also extending to the International Community. Peace is, therefore, "the fruit of the order planted in human society by its divine Founder, and which men, always thirsting for a more perfect justice, must carry out." This ideal of peace "cannot be achieved if the good of the people and the spontaneous communication between men of their intellectual and spiritual riches are not ensured."

496
496. Violence is never a just response. The Church proclaims, with the conviction of her faith in Christ and with the awareness of her mission, "that violence is an evil, that violence is unacceptable as a solution to problems, that violence is unworthy of man." Violence is a lie, because it goes against the truth of our faith, the truth of our humanity. Violence destroys what it seeks to defend: the dignity, life, freedom of the human being.

497
497. The Magisterium condemns "the cruelty of war" and asks that it be considered from a completely new perspective: "In our era, which boasts of possessing atomic energy, it is absurd to maintain that war is a suitable means to compensate for violated rights." War is a "scourge" and never represents an ideal means to resolve the problems that arise between Nations: "It never has been and it never will be," because it generates new and more complex conflicts. When it breaks out, war becomes "a useless massacre," an "adventure without return," which threatens the present and endangers the future of humanity: "Nothing is lost with peace; everything can be lost with war. The damages caused by an armed conflict are not only material, but also moral. War is, in short, “the failure of all authentic humanism”, “it is always a defeat of humanity”: “never again against each other, never again! ...never again war, never again war! ».

498
498. The search for alternative solutions to war to resolve international conflicts has today acquired a character of dramatic urgency, since "the enormous power of the means of destruction, accessible even to medium and small powers, and the increasingly closer connection between the peoples of the entire earth, make it very difficult or practically impossible to limit the consequences of a conflict." It is, therefore, essential to search for the causes that give rise to a war conflict, above all those related to structural situations of injustice, misery and exploitation, on which we must intervene in order to eliminate them: « Therefore, the other name of peace is development. Just as there is a collective responsibility to avoid war, there is also a collective responsibility to promote development.

499
499. States do not always have the appropriate instruments to effectively provide for their defense: hence the need and importance of international and regional organizations, which must be able to collaborate to confront conflicts and promote peace, establishing relationships of mutual trust, which make resorting to war unthinkable. "It is to be hoped that people, through institutionalized relations and contacts, will come to know better the social bonds with which human nature unites them and will understand with increasing clarity that among the main duties of common human nature must be placed that individual and international relations obey love and not fear, because above all it is characteristic of love to lead men to a sincere and multiple material and spiritual collaboration, from which so many goods can be derived for them."

500
500. A war of aggression is intrinsically immoral. In the tragic event that war breaks out, those responsible for the attacked State have the right and duty to organize the defense, even using force of arms. For the use of force to be legal, certain rigorous conditions must be met simultaneously: «—that the damage caused by the aggressor to the Nation or to the community of nations is lasting, serious and certain; —that all other means of ending the aggression have proven impracticable or ineffective; —that the serious conditions for success are met; —that the use of weapons does not entail evils and disorders more serious than the evil it is intended to eliminate. The power of modern means of destruction requires extreme caution in the assessment of this condition. These are the traditional elements enumerated in the so-called “just war” doctrine. The appreciation of these conditions of moral legitimacy belongs to the prudent judgment of those who are in charge of the common good.

501
501. The Charter of the United Nations, arising from the tragedy of the Second World War, and aimed at preserving future generations from the scourge of war, is based on the general prohibition of the use of force to resolve conflicts between States, with the exception of two cases: self-defense and measures taken by the Security Council, within the scope of its responsibilities, to maintain peace. In any case, the exercise of the right to defend oneself must respect "the traditional limits of necessity and proportionality."

502
502. The requirements of legitimate defense justify the existence of armed forces in States, whose action must be at the service of peace: those who guard the security and freedom of a country in this spirit make a genuine contribution to peace. People who serve in the armed forces have the specific duty to defend goodness, truth and justice in the world; There are many who in this context have sacrificed their own lives for these values ​​and for defending innocent lives. The growing number of soldiers working in multinational forces, in the field of "humanitarian and peace missions", promoted by the United Nations, is a significant fact.

503
503. Members of the armed forces are morally obliged to oppose orders that prescribe crimes against the law of nations and its universal principles. The military is fully responsible for the acts they carry out that violate the rights of individuals and peoples or the norms of international humanitarian law. These acts cannot be justified with the motive of obedience to superior orders.

504
504. The right to use force in self-defense is associated with the duty to protect and help innocent victims who cannot defend themselves from aggression. In modern era conflicts, often within the same State, the provisions of international humanitarian law must also be fully respected. Very often the civilian population is attacked, sometimes even as a military objective. In some cases they are brutally murdered or eradicated from their homes and the land itself with forced emigration, under the pretext of unacceptable "ethnic cleansing." In these tragic circumstances, it is necessary that humanitarian aid reaches the civilian population and is never used to condition the beneficiaries: the good of the human person must take precedence over the interests of the parties in conflict.

505
505. The principle of humanity, inscribed in the conscience of each person and people, entails the obligation to protect the civilian population from the effects of war: "This minimum protection of the dignity of every human being, guaranteed by international humanitarian law, is very often violated in the name of military or political demands, which should never prevail over the value of the human person. It is necessary today to achieve a new consensus on humanitarian principles and strengthen their foundations, to prevent atrocities and abuses from being repeated.

506
506. Attempts to eliminate entire national, ethnic, religious or linguistic groups are crimes against God and against humanity itself, and the perpetrators of these crimes must be brought to justice. The 20th century has been tragically characterized by various genocides: those of the Armenians, the Ukrainians, the Cambodians, those that occurred in Africa and the Balkans. Among them, the Holocaust of the Hebrew people, the Shoah, stands out: "The days of the Shoah have marked a true night in history, recording unprecedented crimes against God and against man."

507
507. Sanctions, in the forms provided for by contemporary international law, seek to correct the behavior of the government of a country that violates the rules of peaceful and orderly international coexistence or that practices serious forms of oppression against the population. The purposes of the sanctions must be specified unequivocally and the measures adopted must be periodically verified by the competent organizations of the International Community, in order to achieve an objective estimate of their effectiveness and their real impact on the civilian population. The true purpose of these measures is to open the way to negotiation and dialogue. Sanctions should never constitute an instrument of direct punishment against the entire population: it is not legal for entire populations to suffer as a result of these sanctions, especially their most vulnerable members. Economic sanctions, in particular, are an instrument that must be used with great consideration and subject to strict legal and ethical criteria. The economic embargo must be limited in time and cannot be justified when the effects it produces are revealed to be indiscriminate.

508
508. Social doctrine proposes the goal of "general, balanced and controlled disarmament." The huge increase in weapons represents a serious threat to stability and peace. The principle of sufficiency, by virtue of which a State can possess only the means necessary for its legitimate defense, must be applied both by States that buy weapons and by those that produce and sell them. Any excessive accumulation of weapons, or their widespread trade, cannot be morally justified; These phenomena must also be judged in light of international regulations on non-proliferation, production, trade and use of different types of weapons. Weapons should never be considered according to the same criteria as other economic goods globally or in domestic markets.

509
509. Weapons of mass destruction – biological, chemical and nuclear – represent a particularly serious threat; Those who possess them have an enormous responsibility before God and all of humanity. The principle of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, together with measures for nuclear disarmament, as well as the prohibition of nuclear tests, constitute closely linked objectives, which must be achieved in the shortest possible time through effective controls at the international level. The prohibition of developing, producing, accumulating and using chemical and biological weapons, as well as the measures that require their destruction, complete the international normative framework to proscribe these harmful weapons, the use of which has been explicitly condemned by the Magisterium: "Any warlike action that tends indiscriminately to the destruction of entire cities or extensive regions along with their inhabitants, is a crime against God and humanity that must be condemned firmly and without hesitation."

510
510. Disarmament must extend to the interdiction of weapons that inflict excessive traumatic effects or that strike indiscriminately, as well as anti-personnel mines, a type of small, inhumanly insidious device, because they continue to cause damage long after the end of hostilities: the States that produce, market or use them must bear the responsibility of seriously delaying the total elimination of these deadly instruments. The International Community must continue to commit itself to clearing minefields, promoting effective cooperation, including technical training, with countries that do not have their own means to carry out this urgent task of cleaning up their territories and that are not in a position to provide adequate assistance to mine victims.

511
511. It is necessary that appropriate measures be adopted to control the production, sale, import and export of light and individual weapons, which encourage many manifestations of violence. The sale and trafficking of these weapons constitute a serious threat to peace: they are the ones that kill the greatest number of people and the most used in non-international conflicts; Its availability increases the risk of new conflicts and the intensity of those in progress. The attitude of States that apply rigid controls to the international traffic in heavy weapons, while never, or only rarely, provide for restrictions on the trade in light and individual weapons, is an unacceptable contradiction. It is essential and urgent that Governments adopt appropriate measures to control the production, accumulation, sale and trafficking of these weapons, in order to counteract their growing diffusion, largely among groups of combatants who do not belong to the armed forces of a State.

512
512. The use of children and adolescents as soldiers in armed conflicts must be denounced, despite the fact that their young age should prevent their recruitment. They are forced to fight by force, or choose to do so on their own initiative without being fully aware of the consequences. These are children deprived not only of the education they should receive and a normal childhood, but also trained to kill: all this constitutes an intolerable crime. Their use in fighting forces of any type must be abolished; At the same time, it is necessary to provide all possible help for the care, education and rehabilitation of those who have participated in combat.

513
513. Terrorism is one of the most brutal forms of violence that currently disturbs the International Community, as it sows hatred, death, desire for revenge and reprisal. From a subversive strategy, typical only of some extremist organizations, aimed at the destruction of things and the murder of people, terrorism has been transformed into a dark network of political complicities, which also uses sophisticated technical means, frequently uses enormous amounts of financial resources and develops large-scale strategies, attacking completely innocent people, casual victims of terrorist actions. The targets of terrorist attacks are, in general, places of daily life and not military objectives in the context of a declared war. Terrorism acts and strikes blindly, outside the rules with which men have tried to regulate their conflicts, for example through international humanitarian law: "In many cases, the use of terrorism methods is accepted as a new system of war." The causes that give rise to this unacceptable form of demand should not be neglected. The fight against terrorism presupposes the moral duty to contribute to creating the conditions so that it does not arise or develop.

514
514. Terrorism must be condemned in the most absolute way. It manifests a total contempt for human life, and no motivation can justify it, since man is always an end, and never a means. Acts of terrorism deeply wound human dignity and constitute an offense to all humanity: "There is, therefore, a right to defend oneself from terrorism." This right cannot, however, be exercised without moral and legal rules, because the fight against terrorists must be conducted respecting human rights and the principles of the rule of law. The identification of the culprits must be duly proven, since criminal responsibility is always personal and, therefore, cannot be extended to the religions, nations or races to which the terrorists belong. International collaboration against terrorist activity «cannot be reduced only to repressive and punitive operations. It is essential that even the necessary resort to force be accompanied by a lucid and determined analysis of the motives underlying terrorist attacks. A determined commitment is also necessary at the "political and pedagogical" level to resolve, with courage and determination, the problems that in some dramatic situations can fuel terrorism: "The recruitment of terrorists is easier in social contexts where rights are violated and injustices are tolerated for too long."

515
515. It is a profanation and blasphemy to proclaim ourselves terrorists in the name of God: in this way, not only man, but also God is instrumentalized, by believing that one fully possesses his truth, instead of wanting to be possessed by it. Defining "martyrs" as those who die carrying out terrorist acts is to subvert the concept of martyrdom, since this is a testimony of those who allow themselves to be killed for not renouncing God and his love, not of those who murder in the name of God.

516
516. The promotion of peace in the world is an integral part of the mission with which the Church continues the redemptive work of Christ on earth. The Church, in fact, is, in Christ, "sacrament", that is, a sign and instrument of peace in the world and for the world. The promotion of true peace is an expression of Christian faith in the love that God nourishes for every human being. From the liberating faith in the love of God emerges a new vision of the world and a new way of approaching others, both to a single person and to an entire people: it is a faith that changes and renews life, inspired by the peace that Christ has left to his disciples ( [+[0]+] ). Motivated solely by this faith, the Church promotes Christian unity and fruitful collaboration with believers of other religions. Religious differences cannot and should not constitute a cause of conflict: the common search for peace by all believers is a decisive factor of unity between peoples. The Church urges individuals, peoples, States and Nations to participate in its concern for the restoration and consolidation of peace, highlighting, in particular, the important role of international law.

517
517. The Church teaches that true peace is possible only through forgiveness and reconciliation. It is not easy to forgive in view of the consequences of war and conflict, because violence, especially when it reaches "the limits of inhumanity and affliction", always leaves as an inheritance a heavy burden of pain, which can only be alleviated through deep, loyal, brave and common reflection between the contenders, capable of facing the difficulties of the present with an attitude purified by repentance. The weight of the past, which cannot be forgotten, can be accepted only in the presence of forgiveness reciprocally offered and received: it is a long and difficult journey, but not impossible.

518
518. Reciprocal forgiveness should not annul the demands of justice, much less impede the path that leads to truth: justice and truth represent, instead, the concrete requirements of reconciliation. The initiatives that tend to establish international judicial organizations are timely. Such organizations, using the principle of universal jurisdiction and supported by adequate procedures, respectful of the rights of the accused and victims, can find the truth about the crimes perpetrated during armed conflicts. It is necessary, however, to go beyond the determination of criminal behavior, whether of action or omission, and decisions on reparation procedures, to reach the reestablishment of relations of reciprocal understanding between divided peoples, in the name of reconciliation. It is also necessary to promote respect for the right to peace: this right "favors the construction of a society within which relations of force are replaced by relations of collaboration with a view to the common good."

519
519. The Church fights for peace with prayer. Prayer opens the heart, not only to a deep relationship with God, but also to an encounter with others inspired by feelings of respect, trust, understanding, esteem and love. Prayer instills courage and sustains "the true friends of peace", those who try to promote it in the various circumstances in which they live. Liturgical prayer is "the summit towards which the activity of the Church tends and, at the same time, the source from which all its strength flows"; in particular the Eucharistic celebration, "source and summit of all Christian life", is the inexhaustible source of all authentic Christian commitment to peace.

520
520. The World Days of Peace are celebrations of special intensity to pray for peace and to commit to building a world of peace. Pope Paul VI instituted them in order to "dedicate to the thoughts and purposes of Peace, a particular celebration on the first day of the civil year." The Pontifical Messages for this annual occasion constitute a rich source of updating and development of social doctrine, and indicate the constant pastoral action of the Church in favor of peace: «Peace is strengthened only with peace; peace not separated from the duties of justice, but nourished by one's own sacrifice, by clemency, by mercy, by charity."

521
521. Aware of the renewing force of Christianity also in its relations with culture and social reality, the Church offers the contribution of its teaching to the construction of the community of men, showing the social meaning of the Gospel. At the end of the 19th century, the Magisterium of the Church organically faced the serious social issues of the time, establishing "a permanent paradigm for the Church." This, in effect, makes its voice heard in certain human situations, individual and community, national and international, for which it formulates a true doctrine, a corpus, that allows it to analyze social realities, pronounce on them and give guidelines for the fair solution of the problems derived from them. The intervention of Leo

522
522. The Church, with its social doctrine, offers above all a comprehensive vision and a full understanding of man, in his personal and social dimension. Christian anthropology, manifesting the inviolable dignity of the person, introduces the realities of work, economics and politics in an original perspective, which illuminates authentic human values ​​and inspires and sustains the commitment of Christian witness in the multiple areas of personal, cultural and social life. Thanks to the “firstfruits of the Spirit” ([+[0]+]), the Christian is able to “fulfill the new law of love ([+[1]+]”). Through this Spirit, which is a pledge of the inheritance ( [+[2]+] ), the whole man is restored internally until the redemption of the body comes ( [+[3]+] )." In this sense, social doctrine emphasizes how the foundation of the morality of all social action consists of the human development of the person and individuates the norm of social action in its correspondence with the true good of humanity and in the commitment to create conditions that allow each man to realize his integral vocation.

523
523. Christian anthropology encourages and sustains the pastoral work of the inculturation of faith, aimed at renewing from within, with the force of the Gospel, the criteria of judgment, the determining values, the lines of thought and the life models of contemporary man: "With inculturation, the Church becomes a more understandable sign of what it is, and a more suitable instrument for its mission." The contemporary world is marked by a fracture between Gospel and culture. A secularized vision of salvation also tends to reduce Christianity to "a merely human wisdom, almost like a science of living well." The Church is aware that it must take “a great step forward in its evangelization; "it must enter a new historical stage of its missionary dynamism." Social teaching is situated in this pastoral perspective: «The “new evangelization”, of which the modern world urgently needs... must include among its essential elements the announcement of the social doctrine of the Church».

524
524. The essential reference to social doctrine determines the nature, approach, structure and development of social pastoral care. This is an expression of the ministry of social evangelization, aimed at illuminating, stimulating and assisting the integral promotion of man through the praxis of Christian liberation, in its earthly and transcendent perspective. The Church lives and works in history, interacting with the society and culture of its time, to fulfill its mission of communicating to all men the novelty of the Christian proclamation, in the concrete reality of its difficulties, struggles and challenges; In this way, faith helps people understand things in the truth that "opening to the love of God is true liberation." Social pastoral care is the living and concrete expression of a Church fully aware of its mission to evangelize the social, economic, cultural and political realities of the world.

525
525. The social message of the Gospel must guide the Church to develop a double pastoral task: helping men to discover the truth and choose the path to follow; and encourage the commitment of Christians to witness, with solicitous service, the Gospel in the social field: "Today more than ever, the Word of God will not be able to be proclaimed or heard if it is not accompanied by the testimony of the power of the Holy Spirit, operating in the action of Christians at the service of their brothers, at the points where their existence and future are at stake." The need for a new evangelization makes the Church understand "that its social message will be made credible by the testimony of works, rather than by its coherence and internal logic."

526
526. Social doctrine dictates the fundamental criteria of pastoral action in the social field: announcing the Gospel; confront the evangelical message with social realities; project actions whose purpose is the renewal of such realities, conforming them to the demands of Christian morality. A new evangelization of social life requires above all the proclamation of the Gospel: God in Jesus Christ saves all men and the whole man. This announcement reveals man to himself and must be the principle of interpretation of social realities. In the proclamation of the Gospel, the social dimension is essential and unavoidable, although it is not the only one. This must show the inexhaustible fruitfulness of Christian salvation, although a perfect and definitive conformation of social realities with the Gospel cannot be achieved in history: no result, not even the most perfect, can escape the limitations of human freedom and the eschatological tension of every created reality.

527
527. The pastoral action of the Church in the social sphere must bear witness above all to the truth about man. Christian anthropology allows for discernment of social problems, for which a correct solution cannot be found if the transcendent character of the human person, fully revealed in faith, is not protected. The social action of Christians must be inspired by the fundamental principle of the centrality of man. From the demand to promote the integral identity of man arises the proposal of the great values ​​that govern an orderly and fruitful coexistence: truth, justice, love, freedom. Social pastoral care strives to ensure that the renewal of public life is linked to effective respect for these values. In this way, the Church, through its multiform evangelical witness, promotes the awareness that the good of each and every one is the inexhaustible resource to develop all social life.

528
528. Social doctrine is an indispensable point of reference for complete Christian formation. The insistence of the Magisterium in proposing this doctrine as an inspiring source of apostolate and social action arises from the persuasion that it constitutes an extraordinary formative resource: "A more exact knowledge of the social doctrine of the Church is absolutely indispensable - especially for the lay faithful committed in various ways in the social and political field." This doctrinal heritage is not adequately taught or known: this is one of the reasons why it is not appropriately translated into concrete behavior.

529
529. The formative value of social doctrine must be more present in catechetical activity. Catechesis is the organic and systematic teaching of Christian doctrine, taught with the aim of initiating believers into the fullness of evangelical life. The ultimate goal of catechesis "is to put one not only in contact, but in communion, in intimacy with Jesus Christ," so that one can recognize the action of the Holy Spirit, from which comes the gift of new life in Christ. With this background perspective, in its service of education in the faith, catechesis should not omit, "but illuminate as it should... realities such as man's action for his integral liberation, the search for a more supportive and fraternal society, the struggles for justice and the construction of peace." For this purpose, it is necessary to seek a comprehensive presentation of the social Magisterium, in its history, in its contents and in its methodologies. A direct reading of the social encyclicals, carried out in the ecclesial context, enriches their reception and application, thanks to the contribution of the various professional skills and knowledge present in the community.

530
530. It is important, especially in the context of catechesis, that the teaching of social doctrine is aimed at motivating action to evangelize and humanize temporal realities. In fact, with this doctrine the Church teaches theoretical-practical knowledge that sustains the commitment to transform social life, to make it increasingly in accordance with divine design. Social catechesis aims at the formation of men who, respectful of the moral order, are lovers of genuine freedom, men who "judge things with their own criteria in the light of the truth, who order their activities with a sense of responsibility and who strive to support all that is true and just, willingly associating their actions with that of others." An extraordinary formative value is found in the testimony of Christianity faithfully lived: "It is the life of holiness, which shines in so many members of God's people often humble and hidden from the eyes of men, that constitutes the simplest and most fascinating path in which we are granted to immediately perceive the beauty of truth, the liberating force of God's love, the value of unconditional fidelity to all the demands of the law of the Lord, even in the most difficult circumstances."

531
531. Social doctrine must be the basis of an intense and constant work of formation, especially that directed at lay Christians. This formation must take into account their commitment to civil life: "It is up to lay people, with their free initiative and without passively waiting for instructions and guidelines, to penetrate the Christian spirit into the mentality and customs, laws and structures of the community in which they live." The first level of formative work aimed at lay Christians must enable them to effectively direct daily tasks in the cultural, social, economic and political spheres, developing in them a sense of duty practiced in the service of the common good. A second level refers to the formation of political consciousness to prepare lay Christians for the exercise of political power: "Those who are or may become capable of exercising that difficult and noble art that is politics, prepare for it and try to exercise it with forgetfulness of self-interest and all venal gain."

532
532. Catholic educational institutions can and must provide a precious formative service, applying themselves with special care to the inculturation of the Christian message, that is, the fruitful encounter between the Gospel and different knowledge. Social doctrine is a necessary instrument for an effective Christian education in love, justice, and peace, as well as for maturing awareness of moral and social duties in the field of various cultural and professional competencies.

533
533. No less relevant should be the commitment to use social doctrine in the formation of priests and candidates for the priesthood, who, in the context of their ministerial preparation, must mature a qualified knowledge of the teaching and pastoral action of the Church in the social sphere and a lively interest in the social issues of their time. The document of the Congregation for Catholic Education, "Guidelines for the study and teaching of the social doctrine of the Church in the formation of priests", offers precise indications and provisions for a correct and adequate organization of studies.

534
534. Social doctrine is an effective instrument of dialogue between Christian communities and the civil and political community, an ideal instrument to promote and inspire attitudes of correct and fruitful collaboration, according to the modalities appropriate to the circumstances. The commitment of the civil and political authorities, called to serve the personal and social vocation of man, according to their own competence and with their own means, can find in the social doctrine of the Church an important support and a rich source of inspiration.

535
535. Social doctrine is a fertile ground for cultivating dialogue and collaboration in the ecumenical field, which today is carried out in various large-scale areas: in the defense of the dignity of human persons; in promoting peace; in the concrete and effective fight against the miseries of our time, such as hunger and destitution, illiteracy, the unjust distribution of goods and homelessness. This multiform cooperation increases awareness of brotherhood in Christ and facilitates the ecumenical path.

536
536. In the common tradition of the Old Testament, the Catholic Church knows that it can dialogue with its Hebrew brothers, also through its social doctrine, to build together a future of justice and peace for all men, children of the one God. The common spiritual heritage favors mutual knowledge and reciprocal esteem, on the basis of which understanding can grow to overcome any discrimination and defend human dignity.

537
537. Social doctrine is also characterized by a constant call for dialogue between all believers of the world's religions, so that they know how to share the search for the most appropriate forms of collaboration: religions have an important role in achieving peace, which depends on the common commitment to the integral development of man. In the spirit of the Prayer Meetings that took place in Assisi, the Church continues to invite believers of other religions to dialogue and to encourage, everywhere, an effective witness to the values ​​common to the entire human family.

538
538. The Church, in the exercise of its mission, commits the entire People of God. In its various articulations and in each of its members, according to the gifts and forms of exercise proper to each vocation, the People of God must correspond to the duty of announcing and bearing witness to the Gospel ([+[0]+]), with the awareness that "the mission concerns all Christians."

539
539. In the particular Church, the first person responsible for the pastoral commitment to evangelization of the social is the Bishop, assisted by priests, men and women religious, and the lay faithful. With special reference to the local reality, the Bishop has the responsibility of promoting the teaching and dissemination of social doctrine, which he provides through appropriate institutions.

540
540. Pastoral action in the social field also makes use of the work of consecrated persons, in accordance with their charisma; Their luminous testimony, particularly in situations of greatest poverty, constitutes a call for all to live the values ​​of holiness and generous service to others. The total gift of self of the religious is offered to common reflection also as an emblematic and prophetic sign of the social doctrine: putting themselves totally at the service of the mystery of Christ's charity for man and the world, the religious anticipate and show in their lives some traits of the new humanity that the social doctrine wants to foster. People consecrated in chastity, poverty and obedience put themselves at the service of pastoral charity, especially with prayer, thanks to which they contemplate God's plan for the world, they beseech the Lord to open the heart of each man so that he may receive within himself the gift of new humanity, the price of Christ's sacrifice.

541
541. The essential connotation of the lay faithful who work in the vineyard of the Lord ( [+[0]+] ), is the secular nature of their following of Christ, which is carried out precisely in the world: "It is up to the laity, by their own vocation, to try to obtain the kingdom of God by managing temporal affairs and ordering them according to God." Through Baptism, the laity are grafted into Christ and made participants in his life and his mission, according to their peculiar identity: «The name of laity is designated here as all the Christian faithful, with the exception of the members of the sacred order and those of the religious state approved by the Church. That is, the faithful who, as incorporated into Christ by baptism, integrated into the People of God and made participants, in their own way, in the priestly, prophetic and royal function of Christ, exercise in the Church and in the world the mission of the entire Christian people in the part that corresponds to them.

542
542. The identity of the lay faithful is born and nourished by the sacraments: Baptism, Confirmation and the Eucharist. Baptism configures Christ, Son of the Father, firstborn of every creature, sent as Teacher and Redeemer to all men. Confirmation configures with Christ, sent to vivify creation and each being with the outpouring of his Spirit. The Eucharist makes the believer a participant in the unique and perfect sacrifice that Christ has offered to the Father, in his flesh, for the salvation of the world.

543
543. It is the proper task of the lay faithful to announce the Gospel with the testimony of an exemplary life, rooted in Christ and lived in temporal realities: the family; professional commitment in the field of work, culture, science and research; the exercise of social, economic, and political responsibilities. All secular human realities, personal and social, environments and historical situations, structures and institutions, are the proper place of living and acting of lay Christians. These realities are recipients of God's love; The commitment of the lay faithful must correspond to this vision and be qualified as an expression of evangelical charity: "Being and acting in the world are for the lay faithful not only an anthropological and sociological reality, but also, and specifically, a theological and ecclesial reality."

544
544. The testimony of the lay faithful is born from a gift of grace, recognized, cultivated and brought to maturity. This is the motivation that makes his commitment in the world significant and places him at the antipodes of the mysticism of action, typical of atheistic humanism, lacking ultimate foundation and limited to a purely temporal perspective. The eschatological horizon is the key that allows us to correctly understand human realities: from the perspective of definitive goods, the lay faithful is able to authentically guide his earthly activity. The standard of living and greater economic productivity are not the only valid indicators to measure the full fulfillment of man in this life, and they are even less valuable if they refer to the future: "Man, in fact, is not limited to a single temporal horizon, but, as a subject of human history, he fully maintains his eternal vocation."

545
545. The lay faithful are called to cultivate an authentic lay spirituality, which regenerates them as new men and women, immersed in the mystery of God and incorporated into society, saints and sanctifiers. This spirituality builds the world according to the Spirit of Jesus: it makes us capable of looking beyond history, without moving away from it; to cultivate a passionate love for God, without taking one's gaze away from one's brothers, whom one can rather see as the Lord sees them and love as He loves them. It is a spirituality that avoids both intimate spiritualism and social activism and knows how to express itself in a vital synthesis that confers unity, meaning and hope to existence, contradictory and fragmented for so many different reasons. Animated by this spirituality, the lay faithful can contribute, "carrying out their own profession guided by the evangelical spirit... to the sanctification of the world as if from within, like a leaven." And thus make Christ manifest before others, primarily through the testimony of your life.

546
546. The lay faithful must strengthen their spiritual and moral life, maturing the capacities required to fulfill their social duties. The deepening of inner motivations and the acquisition of a style appropriate to commitment in the social and political field are the result of a dynamic and permanent commitment to formation, aimed above all at harmonizing life, in its entirety, and faith. In the experience of the believer, in fact, «there cannot be two parallel lives: on the one hand, the so-called “spiritual” life, with its values ​​and demands; and on the other hand, the so-called “secular” life, that is, family life, work, social relationships, political commitment and culture.

547
547. The lay faithful must act according to the demands dictated by prudence: this is the virtue available to discern the true good in each circumstance and choose the appropriate means to achieve it. Thanks to it, moral principles are correctly applied to particular cases. Prudence is articulated in three moments: clarifies the situation and evaluates it; inspires decision and gives impetus to action. The first moment is characterized by reflection and consultation to study the issue, asking for the necessary advice; The second moment is the evaluative moment of analysis and judgment of reality in light of God's project; The third moment, that of the decision, is based on the preceding phases, which make possible the discernment between the actions that must be carried out.

548
548. Prudence enables us to make coherent decisions, with realism and a sense of responsibility regarding the consequences of one's own actions. The very widespread vision that identifies prudence with cunning, utilitarian calculation, distrust, or even with timidity and indecision, is very far from the correct conception of this virtue, typical of practical reason, which helps to decide sensibly and courageously the actions to be carried out, becoming a measure of the other virtues. Prudence ratifies the good as a duty and shows the way in which the person determines to fulfill it. It is, in short, a virtue that requires the mature exercise of thought and responsibility, with objective knowledge of the situation and a right will that guides the decision.

549
549. The social doctrine of the Church must enter, as an integral part, in the formative path of the lay faithful. Experience shows that the work of formation is normally possible in ecclesial groups of lay people, which respond to precise criteria of ecclesiality: «Groups, associations and movements also have their place in the formation of the lay faithful. They have, in fact, the possibility, each with their own methods, of offering a formation deeply grafted on the same experience of apostolic life, as well as the opportunity to complete, concretize and specify the formation that their members receive.

550
550. The social doctrine of the Church is of utmost importance for ecclesial groups whose objective of commitment is pastoral action in the social sphere. These constitute a privileged point of reference, since they operate in social life in accordance with their ecclesial physiognomy and demonstrate, in this way, how relevant the value of prayer, reflection and dialogue is to understand social realities and improve them. In any case, the distinction is valid "between the action that Christians, isolated or in association, carry out in their personal capacity, as citizens in accordance with their Christian conscience, and the action that they carry out, in the name of the Church, in communion with their pastors."

551
551. The presence of the lay faithful in the social field is characterized by the service, sign and expression of charity, which is manifested in family, cultural, work, economic and political life, according to specific profiles: obeying the various demands of their particular area of commitment, the lay faithful express the truth of their faith and, at the same time, the truth of the social doctrine of the Church, which finds its full realization when it is lived concretely to solve social problems. The very credibility of social doctrine lies, in effect, in the testimony of works, rather than in its coherence and internal logic.

552
552. Among the areas of social commitment of the lay faithful, service to the human person emerges above all: the promotion of the dignity of the person, the most precious good that man possesses, is “an essential task; indeed, in a certain sense it is the central and unifying task of the service that the Church, and in it the lay faithful, are called to provide to the human family.

553
553. The promotion of human dignity implies, above all, the affirmation of the inviolable right to life, from conception to natural death, the first among all and a condition for all other human rights. Respect for personal dignity also requires recognition of the religious dimension of man, which is not “a simply “confessional” demand, but rather a demand that finds its inextricable root in the very reality of man. The effective recognition of the right to freedom of conscience and religious freedom is one of the highest goods and most serious duties of every people who truly wants to ensure the good of the person and society. In the current cultural context, the commitment to defend marriage and the family acquires special urgency, which can be adequately fulfilled only with the conviction of the unique and irreplaceable value of these realities in order to the authentic development of human coexistence.

554
554. Culture must constitute a privileged field of presence and commitment for the Church and for each Christian. The separation between the Christian faith and daily life is judged by the Second Vatican Council to be one of the most serious errors of our time. The loss of the metaphysical horizon; the loss of nostalgia for God in selfish narcissism and the overabundance of means typical of a consumerist lifestyle; the primacy attributed to technology and scientific research as an end in themselves; the exaltation of appearance, the search for image, communication techniques: all these phenomena must be understood in their cultural aspects and related to the central theme of the human person, their integral growth, their capacity for communication and relationship with other men, their continuous questioning about the great questions that connote existence. Keep in mind that «culture is that through which man, as man, becomes more of a man, “is” more, has more access to “being”».

555
555. A particular field of commitment of the lay faithful must be the promotion of a social and political culture inspired by the Gospel. Recent history has shown the weakness and radical failure of some widely shared and long-dominant cultural perspectives, especially at the political and social levels. In this area, especially in the decades after the Second World War, Catholics, in various countries, have been able to develop a high commitment, which testifies, today with increasing evidence, to the consistency of their inspiration and their heritage of values. The social and political commitment of Catholics, in fact, has never been limited to the mere transformation of structures, because it is driven at its base by a culture that welcomes and accounts for the instances that derive from faith and morality, placing them as the foundation and objective of concrete projects. When this awareness is lacking, Catholics themselves condemn themselves to cultural dispersion, impoverishing and limiting their proposals. Presenting in updated cultural terms the heritage of the Catholic Tradition, its values, its contents, the entire spiritual, intellectual and moral heritage of Catholicism, is also today's priority urgency. Faith in Jesus Christ, who defined himself "the Way, the Truth and the Life" ([+[0]+]), drives Christians to establish themselves with ever-renewed commitment in the construction of a social and political culture inspired by the Gospel.

556
556. The integral perfection of the person and the good of the entire society are the essential purposes of culture: the ethical dimension of culture is, therefore, a priority in the social and political action of the lay faithful. Neglecting this dimension easily transforms culture into an instrument of impoverishment of humanity. A culture can become sterile and headed towards decadence, when "it closes in on itself and tries to perpetuate outdated ways of life, rejecting any change and confrontation about the truth of man." The formation of a culture capable of enriching man requires, on the contrary, the full commitment of the person, who deploys in it all his creativity, his intelligence, his knowledge of the world and of men, and there he also uses his capacity for self-control, personal sacrifice, solidarity and availability to promote the common good.

557
557. The social and political commitment of the lay faithful in the cultural sphere currently involves some precise directions. The first is the one that seeks to ensure to each and every one the right to a human and civil culture, "required by the dignity of the person, without distinction of race, sex, nationality, religion or social condition." This right implies the right of families and individuals to a free and open school; freedom of access to social media, for which any form of monopoly and ideological control must be avoided; freedom of research, dissemination of thought, debate and confrontation. At the root of the poverty of so many peoples are also various forms of cultural destitution and unrecognized cultural rights. The commitment to the education and formation of the person constitutes, at all times, the first request of the social action of Christians.

558
558. The second challenge for the commitment of the lay Christian refers to the content of culture, that is, to truth. The question of truth is essential for culture, because all men have "the duty to preserve the structure of the entire human person, in which the values ​​of intelligence, will, conscience and fraternity stand out." A correct anthropology is the criterion that illuminates and verifies the various historical cultural forms. The commitment of the Christian in the cultural sphere is opposed to all reductive and ideological visions of man and life. The dynamism of openness to the truth is guaranteed above all by the fact that "the cultures of the various Nations are, fundamentally, so many different ways of posing the question about the meaning of personal existence."

559
559. Christians must work generously to give its full value to the religious dimension of culture: this task is extremely important and urgent to achieve the quality of human life, on the social and individual level. The question that comes from the mystery of life and refers to the greatest mystery, that of God, is, in fact, at the center of all culture; Canceling this area entails corruption of the culture and moral life of the Nations. The authentic religious dimension is constitutive of man and allows him to capture in his various activities the horizon in which they find meaning and direction. Man's religiosity or spirituality is manifested in the forms of culture, to which it gives vitality and inspiration. Countless works of art from all times testify to this. When the religious dimension of a person or a people is denied, the culture itself deteriorates; sometimes reaching the point of making it disappear.

560
560. In promoting an authentic culture, the lay faithful will give great importance to the media of social communication, considering above all the contents of the innumerable decisions made by people: all these decisions, although they vary from one group to another and from person to person, have a moral weight, and must be evaluated under this profile. To choose correctly, it is necessary to know the moral rules and apply them faithfully. The Church offers an extensive tradition of wisdom, rooted in divine Revelation and human reflection, whose theological orientation is an important corrective « both for the “atheist” solution, which deprives man of an essential part, the spiritual, and for the permissive or consumerist solutions, which with various pretexts try to convince him of his independence from all law and from God himself. » Rather than judging the media of social communication, this tradition is put at his service: « The culture of wisdom, typical of the "The Church can prevent the information culture, typical of the media, from becoming an accumulation of meaningless facts."

561
561. The lay faithful will consider the media as possible and powerful instruments of solidarity: "Solidarity appears as a consequence of true and fair information, and the free circulation of ideas, which promote knowledge and respect for others." This does not happen if social media are used to build and sustain economic systems at the service of greed and ambition. The decision to completely ignore some aspects of human suffering caused by grave injustices is an indefensible choice. The structures and policies of communication and distribution of technology are factors that contribute to some people being information "rich" and others information "poor", in an era when prosperity and even survival depend on information. In this way, social media contribute to the injustices and imbalances that cause the same pain that they then report as information. Communication and information technologies, together with training in their use, must aim to eliminate these injustices and imbalances.

562
562. The professionals of these media are not the only ones who have ethical duties. Users also have obligations. Operators who try to assume their responsibilities deserve a public aware of their own. The first duty of users of social communications consists of discernment and selection. Parents, families and the Church have precise and inalienable responsibilities. Those who relate in different ways to the field of social communications must take into account the strong and clear admonition of Saint Paul: "Therefore, putting away lies, speak truthfully, each one to his neighbor, for we are members one of another... Let no harmful word come out of your mouths, but only such as is convenient for building up according to need and doing good to those who hear you" ([+[0]+]). The essential ethical demands of the media of social communication are service to the person through the building of a human community based on solidarity, justice and love and the dissemination of the truth about human life and its final fulfillment in God. In the light of faith, human communication must be considered a journey from Babel to Pentecost, that is, the commitment, personal and social, to overcome the collapse of communication ( [+[1]+] ) by opening to the gift of tongues ( [+[2]+] ), to communication reestablished with the strength of the Spirit, sent by the Son.

563
563. Given the complexity of the contemporary economic context, the lay faithful must guide their actions by the principles of the social Magisterium. It is necessary that these principles be known and accepted in the economic activity itself: when these principles are neglected, starting with the centrality of the human person, the quality of economic activity is endangered.

564
564. Scholars of economic science, workers in the sector and policy makers must note the urgency of rethinking the economy, considering, on the one hand, the dramatic material poverty of billions of people and, on the other, the fact that "the current economic, social and cultural structures find it difficult to cope with the demands of authentic development." The legitimate demands of economic efficiency must be better harmonized with those of political participation and social justice. This means, specifically, impregnating with solidarity the networks of economic, political and social interdependence, which the ongoing globalization processes tend to increase. In this rethinking effort, which appears to be articulated and is intended to influence the conceptions of economic reality, Christian-inspired associations that operate in the economic field are of great value: associations of workers, businessmen, and economists.

565
565. For the lay faithful, political commitment is a qualified and demanding expression of Christian commitment to the service of others. The search for the common good with a spirit of service; the development of justice with particular attention to situations of poverty and suffering; respect for the autonomy of earthly realities; the principle of subsidiarity; the promotion of dialogue and peace within the horizon of solidarity: these are the orientations that should inspire the political action of lay Christians. All believers, as holders of civic rights and duties, are obliged to respect these guidelines; Those who carry out direct and institutional tasks in the management of the complex problems of public affairs, whether in local administrations or in national and international institutions, must take them especially into account.

566
566. Positions of responsibility in social and political institutions require a rigorous and articulated commitment, which knows how to demonstrate, with the contributions of reflection in the political debate, with the development of projects and with operational decisions, the absolute necessity of the moral component in social and political life. Inadequate attention to the moral dimension leads to the dehumanization of associated life and of social and political institutions, consolidating "structures of sin": "Living and acting politically in accordance with one's own conscience is not accommodating positions foreign to political commitment or a form of confessionalism, but rather an expression of the contribution of Christians so that, through politics, a social order that is more just and consistent with the dignity of the human person is established."

567
567. In the context of the political commitment of the lay faithful, preparation for the exercise of power requires particular care, which believers must assume, especially when their fellow citizens entrust them with this task, according to democratic rules. Christians appreciate the democratic system, "to the extent that it ensures the participation of citizens in political options and guarantees the governed the possibility of choosing and controlling their own rulers, or of replacing them in a timely manner in a peaceful manner," and they reject hidden power groups that seek to condition or subvert the functioning of legitimate institutions. The exercise of authority must assume the character of service, it must always be developed within the scope of the moral law to achieve the common good: whoever exercises political authority must converge the energies of all citizens towards this objective, not in an authoritarian way, but using the moral force nourished by freedom.

568
568. The lay faithful is called to identify, in concrete political situations, the actions that are truly possible to put into practice the principles and moral values ​​proper to social life. This requires a method of discernment, personal and community, articulated around some key points: knowledge of situations, analyzed with the help of social sciences and appropriate instruments; systematic reflection on reality, in light of the immutable message of the Gospel and the social teaching of the Church; the individualization of options aimed at making the present situation evolve in a positive sense. Concrete and effective operational options derive from the depth of listening and interpretation of reality; to which, however, an absolute value should never be attributed, because no problem can be resolved definitively: "Faith has never attempted to enclose socio-political contents in a rigid scheme, aware that the historical dimension in which man lives requires verifying the presence of imperfect and often rapidly changing situations."

569
569. An emblematic situation for the exercise of discernment occurs in the functioning of the democratic system, which many today consider from an agnostic and relativist perspective, which leads to seeing the truth as a product determined by the majority and conditioned by political balances. In a similar context, discernment is especially serious and delicate when it is exercised in areas such as the objectivity and correctness of information, scientific research or economic options that impact the lives of the poorest or in realities that refer to fundamental and inalienable moral demands, such as the sacredness of life, the indissolubility of marriage, the promotion of the family founded on marriage between a man and a woman.

570
570. When in areas and realities that refer to fundamental ethical demands, legislative and political decisions are proposed or taken that are contrary to Christian principles and values, the Magisterium teaches that "a well-formed Christian conscience does not allow anyone to favor with their own vote the implementation of a political program or the approval of a particular law that contains alternative proposals or that are contrary to the fundamental contents of faith and morals."

571
571. The political commitment of Catholics is often linked to "secularism", that is, the distinction between the political sphere and the religious sphere. This distinction "is a value acquired and recognized by the Church, and belongs to the heritage of civilization achieved." Catholic moral doctrine, however, clearly excludes the perspective of a secularism understood as autonomy with respect to the moral law: «In effect, “secularism” indicates first of all the attitude of those who respect the truths that emanate from natural knowledge about the man who lives in society, although such truths are taught at the same time by a specific religion, since the truth is one.» Sincerely seeking the truth, promoting and defending with lawful means the moral truths that refer to social life - justice, freedom, respect for life and other rights of the person - is a right and a duty of all members of a social and political community.

572
572. The principle of secularism entails respect for any religious confession by the State, "which ensures the free exercise of religious, spiritual, cultural and charitable activities of communities of believers." In a pluralistic society, secularism is a place of communication between the various spiritual traditions and the Nation. Unfortunately, there still remain, also in democratic societies, expressions of intolerant secularism, which hinder all types of political and cultural relevance of the faith, seeking to disqualify the social and political commitment of Christians only because they recognize themselves in the truths that the Church teaches and obey the moral duty of being consistent with their own conscience; it even reaches the most radical denial of natural ethics itself. This denial, which foresees a condition of moral anarchy, whose obvious consequence is the oppression of the strongest over the weak, cannot be accepted by any form of legitimate pluralism, because it undermines the very bases of human coexistence. In light of this state of affairs, "the marginalization of Christianity... would certainly not favor the future of any project of society or harmony between peoples, but rather would endanger the very spiritual and cultural foundations of civilization."

573
573. A special area of discernment for the lay faithful concerns the choice of political instruments, or adherence to a party and other expressions of political participation. It is necessary to make a choice consistent with values, taking into account real circumstances. In any case, every choice must always be rooted in charity and tend to seek the common good. The instances of the Christian faith can hardly be found in a single political position: claiming that a party or a political formation corresponds completely to the demands of the Christian faith and life generates dangerous misunderstandings. The Christian cannot find a political party that fully responds to the ethical demands that arise from faith and belonging to the Church: his adherence to a political formation will never be ideological, but always critical, so that the party and its political project are stimulated to carry out ways that are increasingly attentive to achieving the common good, including the spiritual end of man.

574
574. The distinction, on the one hand, between instances of faith and socio-political options and, on the other, between the particular options of Christians and those made by the Christian community as such, means that joining a political party or formation is considered a personal decision, legitimate at least within the limits of parties and positions not incompatible with Christian faith and values. The choice of the party, of the political formation, of the people to whom to entrust public life, even when it compromises the conscience of each one, cannot be an exclusively individual choice: "It is up to Christian communities to objectively analyze the situation of their country, clarify it through the light of the unalterable word of the Gospel, deduce principles of reflection, norms of judgment and guidelines for action according to the social teachings of the Church." In any case, "no one is allowed to claim the authority of the Church exclusively in favor of his opinion": believers must instead try to "sheed light to each other with sincere dialogue, maintaining mutual charity and the primordial concern for the common good."

575
575. Contemporary society notices and lives profusely a new need for meaning: "Man will always want to know, at least confusingly, the meaning of his life, his action and his death." Attempts to satisfy the demands of projecting the future in the new context of international relations, increasingly more complex and interdependent, and at the same time less orderly and peaceful, are difficult. The life and death of people seem to be entrusted solely to scientific and technological progress, which advances much faster than the human capacity to establish its goals and evaluate its costs. Many phenomena indicate, on the contrary, that "in the richest nations, men, increasingly dissatisfied with the possession of material goods, abandon the utopia of a lasting paradise here on earth." At the same time, all humanity is not only acquiring an increasingly clear awareness of the inviolable and universal rights of the human person, but is also striving with all kinds of resources to establish mutual relations among men that are more just and appropriate to their own dignity.

576
576. To the fundamental questions about the meaning and purpose of the human adventure, the Church responds with the announcement of the Gospel of Christ, which rescues the dignity of the human person from the vacillation of opinions, ensuring the freedom of man as no human law can do. The Second Vatican Council indicates that the mission of the Church in the contemporary world consists of helping each human being to discover in God the ultimate meaning of their existence: the Church knows well that "only God, whom she serves, responds to the deepest aspirations of the human heart, which is never fully satisfied with earthly foods alone." Only God, who created man in his image and redeemed him from sin, can offer a fully adequate answer to the most radical human questions through the Revelation made in his Son made man: the Gospel, in fact, “announces and proclaims the freedom of the children of God, rejects all slavery, which ultimately derives from sin; holy respects the dignity of conscience and its free decision; He constantly warns that all human talent must result in the service of God and the good of humanity; finally, entrusts everyone to the charity of all.

577
577. Faith in God and in Jesus Christ illuminates the moral principles that are "the only and irreplaceable foundation of stable tranquility on which the internal and external order of private and public life is based, which alone can engender and safeguard the prosperity of the States." Social life must adjust to the divine plan: "The theological dimension becomes necessary to interpret and resolve the current problems of human coexistence." In the face of serious forms of exploitation and social injustice, “the need for a radical personal and social renewal capable of ensuring justice, solidarity, honesty and transparency is becoming increasingly widespread and intensified. Certainly the path that must be followed is long and tiring; There are many and great efforts to be made so that such a renewal can take place, even due to the multiple and serious causes that generate and favor the situations of injustice present in the world today. But, as each person's experience and history teach, it is not difficult to find, at the origin of these situations, properly “cultural” causes, related to a certain vision of man, society and the world. In reality, at the center of the cultural question is the moral sense, which in turn is based and realized in the religious sense. Also with regard to the "social question" we must avoid "the naive conviction that there is a magic formula for the great challenges of our time." No, it will not be a formula that will save us, but it will be a Person and the certainty that he instills in us: I am with you! It is not, therefore, about inventing a new program. The program already exists. It is the same as always, collected by the Gospel and living Tradition. It focuses, ultimately, on Christ himself, whom we must know, love and imitate, to live in him the Trinitarian life and transform history with him until its perfection in the heavenly Jerusalem.

578
578. The Church teaches man that God offers him the real possibility of overcoming evil and achieving good. The Lord has redeemed man, he has ransomed him at a dear price ( [+[0]+] ). The meaning and foundation of Christian commitment in the world derive from this certainty, capable of igniting hope, despite the sin that deeply marks human history: the divine promise guarantees that the world does not remain closed in on itself, but open to the Kingdom of God. The Church knows the effects of the « mystery of impiety » ( [+[1]+] ), but also knows that « there are sufficient qualities and energies in the human person, and there is a fundamental “goodness” ( [+[2]+] ), because it is the image of its Creator, placed under the redeeming influence of Christ, “close to every man”, and because the effective action of the Holy Spirit “fills the earth” ( [+[3]+] ) ».

579
579. Christian hope gives a strong determination to commitment in the social field, instilling confidence in the possibility of building a better world, knowing well that there cannot be a "lasting paradise here on earth." Christians, especially the lay faithful, must behave in such a way that "the virtue of the Gospel shines in daily, family and social life." They manifest themselves as children of promise to the extent that, strong in faith and hope, they take advantage of the present time ( [+[0]+] ) and patiently wait for future glory ( [+[1]+] ). But do not hide this hope within your soul, but rather manifest it, even through the structures of secular life, in a constant renewal and in a struggle with the rulers of this dark world, against the evil spirits ( [+[2]+] )." The religious motivations for this commitment may not be shared, but the moral convictions that derive from them constitute a meeting point between Christians and all men of good will.

580
580. The immediate purpose of social doctrine is to propose the principles and values that can strengthen a society worthy of man. Among these principles, that of solidarity to a certain extent includes all the others: this constitutes "one of the basic principles of the Christian conception of social and political organization."

581
581. Love must be present and permeate all social relationships: especially those who have the duty to provide for the good of the people "strive to preserve in themselves and instill in others, from the highest to the most humble, charity, the lady and queen of all virtues. Since the desired solution is to be expected mainly from charity, we understand Christian charity, which summarizes in itself the entire law of the Gospel, and which, ready at all times to give itself for the good of others, is the surest antidote against the insolvency and selfishness of the world. This love can be called "social charity" or "political charity" and must be extended to the entire human race. "Social love" is situated at the antipodes of selfishness and individualism: without absolutizing social life, as happens in horizontalist visions that remain exclusively sociological, it cannot be forgotten that the integral development of the person and social growth condition each other. Egoism, therefore, is the most deleterious enemy of an orderly society: history shows the devastation that occurs in hearts when man is not capable of recognizing another value and another effective reality than material goods, whose obsessive search suffocates and prevents his ability to deliver.

582
582. To create a more humane society, more worthy of the person, it is necessary to revalue love in social life—on a political, economic, and cultural level—making it the constant and supreme norm of action. If justice "is in itself capable of serving as an "arbitrator" between men in the reciprocal distribution of objective goods according to an adequate measure, love, on the other hand, and only love ([+[0]+]), is capable of restoring man to himself." Human relationships cannot be regulated solely by the measure of justice: «The Christian knows that love is the reason why God enters into a relationship with man. It is also love that He expects as a response from man. That is why love is the highest and noblest form of relationship between human beings and each other. Love must animate, therefore, all areas of human life, extending equally to the international order. Only a humanity in which the “civilization of love” reigns will be able to enjoy authentic and lasting peace. In this sense, the Magisterium strongly recommends solidarity because it is in a position to guarantee the common good, as it favors the integral development of people: charity "makes you see yourself in your neighbor."

583
583. Only charity can completely change man. Such a change does not mean annulling the earthly dimension in a disembodied spirituality. Whoever thinks to conform to the supernatural virtue of love without taking into account its corresponding natural foundation, which includes the duties of justice, is deceiving himself: «Charity represents the greatest social commandment. Respect others and their rights. It demands the practice of justice and is the only thing that makes us capable of it. It inspires a life of self-giving: “Whoever tries to save his life will lose it; and whoever loses it will keep it” ( [+[0]+] ) ». But charity cannot be exhausted in the earthly dimension of human and social relationships, because all its effectiveness derives from the reference to God: «In the evening of this life, I will appear before you empty-handed, because I do not ask you, Lord, to keep an account of my works. All our righteousnesses have spots in your eyes. Therefore, I want to clothe myself with your own Justice and receive from your Love the eternal possession of Yourself... ».
