1
1. The lay faithful ([+[0]+]), whose "vocation and mission in the Church and in the world twenty years after the Second Vatican Council" was the theme of the Synod of Bishops of 1987, belong to that People of God represented in the workers of the vineyard, of whom the Gospel of Matthew speaks: "The Kingdom of Heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard. Having agreed with the workers on a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard" ([+[1]+]).

2
2. «He then went out around nine in the morning, saw others who were unoccupied in the square and said to them: "You also go to my vineyard"» ([+[0]+]).

3
3. The fundamental meaning of this Synod, and therefore the most valuable fruit desired by it, is the acceptance by the lay faithful of the call of Christ to work in his vineyard, to take an active, conscious and responsible part in the mission of the Church in this magnificent and dramatic hour of history, before the imminent arrival of the third millennium.

4
4. How can we not think about the persistent spread of religious indifference and atheism in its most diverse forms, particularly in that “perhaps more widespread today” of secularism? Intoxicated by the prodigious achievements of unstoppable scientific-technical development, and fascinated above all by the oldest and always new temptation of wanting to become like God ( [+[0]+] ) through the use of limitless freedom, man uproots the religious roots that are in his heart: he forgets about God, considers Him meaningless for his own existence, rejects Him by starting to worship the most diverse "idols."

5
5. We also think about the multiple violations to which the human person is subjected today. When he is not recognized and loved in his dignity as the living image of God ([+[0]+]), the human being is exposed to the most humiliating and aberrant forms of "instrumentalization", which miserably turn him into a slave of the strongest. And "the strongest" can take on various names: ideology, economic power, inhuman political systems, scientific technocracy, subjugation by the mass media. Once again we find ourselves facing a multitude of people, our brothers and sisters, whose fundamental rights are violated, also as a consequence of the excessive tolerance and even the patent injustice of certain civil laws: the right to life and physical integrity, the right to home and work, the right to family and responsible procreation, the right to participation in public and political life, the right to freedom of conscience and profession of religious faith.

6
6. Finally, we cannot help but remember another phenomenon that characterizes present humanity. Perhaps like never before in its history, humanity is daily and deeply attacked and deranged by conflict. This is a pluriform phenomenon, which is distinguished from the legitimate pluralism of mentalities and initiatives, and which manifests itself in the disastrous confrontation between people, groups, categories, nations and blocks of nations. It is an antagonism that assumes forms of violence, terrorism, and war. Once again, but in much larger proportions, various sectors of contemporary humanity, wanting to demonstrate their "omnipotence", renew the foolish experience of the construction of the "tower of Babel" ([+[0]+]), which, however, proliferates confusion, struggle, disintegration and oppression. The human family thus finds itself dramatically disturbed and torn within itself.

7
7. This is the immense and sad field that is before the workers sent by the "owner of the house" to work in his vineyard.

8
8. The image of the vineyard is used in the Bible in many ways and with diverse meanings; In a particular way, it serves to express the mystery of the People of God. From this more interior point of view, the lay faithful are not simply the workers who work in the vineyard, but are part of the vineyard itself: “I am the vine; you are the branches” ([+[0]+]), says Jesus.

9
9. The Synod Fathers have rightly pointed out the need to identify and propose a positive description of the vocation and mission of the lay faithful, deepening the study of the doctrine of the Second Vatican Council, in the light of the recent documents of the Magisterium and the experience of the life itself of the Church guided by the Holy Spirit.

10
10. It is not an exaggeration to say that the entire existence of the lay faithful has the objective of bringing him to know the radical Christian novelty that derives from Baptism, a sacrament of faith, so that he can live his baptismal commitments according to the vocation he has received from God. To describe the “figure” of the lay faithful we will now consider directly and explicitly – among others – these three fundamental aspects: Baptism regenerates us to the life of the children of God; It unites us to Jesus Christ and his Body, which is the Church; He anoints us in the Holy Spirit, constituting us into spiritual temples.

11
11. We remember the words of Jesus to Nicodemus: "Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter the Kingdom of God" ( [+[0]+] ). Holy Baptism is, therefore, a new birth, it is a regeneration.

12
12. Regenerated as "sons in the Son," the baptized are inseparably "members of Christ and members of the body of the Church," as the Council of Florence teaches.

13
13. With another image - that of the building - the apostle Peter defines the baptized as "living stones" founded on Christ, the "cornerstone", and destined for the "construction of a spiritual building" ([+[0]+]). The image introduces us to another aspect of baptismal novelty, which the Second Vatican Council presented in this way: "By the regeneration and anointing of the Holy Spirit, the baptized are consecrated as a spiritual house."

14
14. Addressing the baptized as "newborn children," the apostle Peter writes: "Coming to Him, a living stone, rejected by men, but chosen and precious before God, you also, as living stones, are used in the construction of a spiritual building, for a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ ( [+[0]+] ). But you are the chosen race, the royal priesthood, the holy nation, the people that God has acquired for himself to proclaim the wonders of Him who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light ( [+[1]+] )” ( [+[2]+] ).

15
15. Christian novelty is the foundation and title of the equality of all those baptized in Christ, of all the members of the People of God: "common is the dignity of the members through their regeneration in Christ, common the grace of children, common the vocation to perfection, one salvation, one hope and undivided charity." By reason of the common baptismal dignity, the lay faithful is co-responsible, together with ordained ministers and religious men and women, for the mission of the Church.

16
16. The dignity of the lay faithful is fully revealed to us when we consider that first and fundamental vocation, which the Father directs to all of them in Jesus Christ through the Spirit: the vocation to holiness, that is, to the perfection of charity. The saint is the most splendid testimony of the dignity conferred on the disciple of Christ.

17
17. The vocation of the lay faithful to holiness implies that life according to the Spirit is expressed particularly in their insertion into temporal realities and in their participation in earthly activities. Again the apostle admonishes us saying: "Whatever you do, in word or deed, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him" ([+[0]+]). Referring these words of the apostle to the lay faithful, the Council categorically states: "Neither care for the family nor other secular duties should be something foreign to the spiritual orientation of life." In turn, the Synod Fathers have said: «The unity of life of the lay faithful is of great importance. They, in fact, must be sanctified in ordinary professional and social life. Therefore, in order to respond to their vocation, the lay faithful must consider the activities of daily life as an occasion of union with God and fulfillment of his will, as well as of service to other men, leading them to communion with God in Christ.

18
18. Let us hear again the words of Jesus: «I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser ( [+[0]+] ). Remain in me, and I in you” ( [+[1]+] ).

19
19. This is the central idea that, at the Second Vatican Council, the Church has once again proposed about itself. The extraordinary Synod of 1985, celebrated twenty years after the conciliar event, reminded us: «The ecclesiology of communion is the central and fundamental idea of ​​the Council documents. Koinonia-communion, founded on Holy Scripture, has been highly appreciated in the ancient Church, and in the Eastern Churches to this day. For this reason, the Second Vatican Council has made a great effort so that the Church as a communion was understood more clearly and concretely translated into practical life. What does the complex word "communion" mean? It is fundamentally about communion with God through Jesus Christ, in the Holy Spirit. This communion takes place in the word of God and in the sacraments. Baptism is the door and the foundation of communion in the Church. The Eucharist is the source and culmination of the entire Christian life ([+[0]+]). The communion of the Eucharistic body of Christ means and produces, that is, builds, the intimate communion of all the faithful in the body of Christ which is the Church ( [+[1]+] )."

20
20. Ecclesial communion is configured, more precisely, as an "organic" communion, analogous to that of a living and functioning body. In fact, it is characterized by the simultaneous presence of diversity and complementarity of vocations and conditions of life, of ministries, of charismas and of responsibilities. Thanks to this diversity and complementarity, each lay faithful is in relationship with the entire body and offers it his or her own contribution.

21
21. The Second Vatican Council presents ministries and charismas as gifts of the Holy Spirit for the edification of the Body of Christ and for the fulfillment of its saving mission in the world. The Church, in fact, is directed and guided by the Spirit, who generously distributes various hierarchical and charismatic gifts among all the baptized, calling them to be “each in their own way” active and co-responsible.

22
22. In the Church we find, first of all, the ordained ministries; that is, the ministries that derive from the sacrament of Orders. In effect, the Lord Jesus chose and constituted the Apostles – germ of the People of the new Alliance and origin of the sacred Hierarchy – with the mandate to convert all nations into disciples ([+[0]+]), to form and govern the priestly people. The mission of the Apostles, which the Lord Jesus continues to entrust to the shepherds of his people, is a true service, significantly called "diakonia" in Holy Scripture; that is, service, ministry. The ministers – in the uninterrupted apostolic succession – receive from the Risen Christ the charisma of the Holy Spirit, through the sacrament of Holy Orders; They thus receive the authority and sacred power to serve the Church "in persona Christi capitis" ([+[1]+]), and to gather it in the Holy Spirit through the Gospel and the Sacraments.

23
23. The saving mission of the Church in the world is carried out not only by the ministers by virtue of the sacrament of Holy Orders, but also by all the lay faithful. In fact, these, by virtue of their baptismal condition and their specific vocation, participate in the priestly, prophetic and royal office of Jesus Christ, each in their own measure.

24
24. The Holy Spirit not only entrusts various ministries to the Church-Communion, but also enriches it with other particular gifts and impulses, called charismas. These can take the most diverse forms, either as expressions of the absolute freedom of the Spirit who gives them, or as a response to the multiple demands of the history of the Church. The description and classification that the New Testament texts make of these gifts is an example of their great variety: «To each one is granted the manifestation of the Spirit for the common use. For the word of wisdom is given to one by the Spirit; to another, the word of knowledge through the same Spirit; to another, faith, in the same Spirit; to another, a charisma of healing, in the one Spirit; to another, power of miracles; to another, the gift of prophecy; to another, the gift of discerning spirits; to another, diversity of languages; to another, finally, the gift of interpreting them" ([+[0]+]).

25
25. The lay faithful participate in the life of the Church not only by carrying out its functions and exercising its charismas, but also in many other ways.

26
26. Ecclesial communion, while always preserving its universal dimension, finds its most visible and immediate expression in the parish. She is the last location of the Church; It is, in a certain sense, the same Church that lives among the homes of its sons and daughters.

27
27. It is now necessary to consider more closely the communion and participation of the lay faithful in the life of the parish. In this sense, the attention of all the lay faithful, men and women, must be drawn to a very true, significant and stimulating expression of the Council: "Within the communities of the Church - we read in the Decree on the apostolate of the laity - their action is so necessary that without it, the very apostolate of the Pastors could not achieve, most of the time, its full effectiveness." This radical statement must be understood, evidently, in the light of the "ecclesiology of communion": being different and complementary, the ministries and the charismas are necessary for the growth of the Church, each according to its own modality.

28
28. The lay faithful, together with priests, men and women religious, constitute the only People of God and Body of Christ.

29
29. The ecclesial communion, already present and operative in the personal action of each one, finds a specific manifestation in the associated actions of the lay faithful; that is, in the solidarity action that they carry out by participating responsibly in the life and mission of the Church.

30
30. The need for clear and precise criteria for discernment and recognition of lay associations, also called "criteria of ecclesiality", is something that is always understood from the perspective of the communion and mission of the Church, and not, therefore, in contrast to freedom of association.

31
31. Pastors in the Church cannot renounce the service of their authority, even in the face of possible and understandable difficulties of some associative forms and the strengthening of new ones, not only for the good of the Church, but also for the good of the lay associations themselves. Thus, they will have to accompany the work of discernment with guidance and, above all, with the encouragement of growth in the associations of the lay faithful in the communion and mission of the Church.

32
32. Let us return once again to the biblical image of the vine and the branches. It introduces us, immediately and naturally, to the consideration of fertility and life. Rooted and vivified by the vine, the branches are called to bear fruit: "I am the vine, you are the branches. He who abides in me and I in him, he bears much fruit" ([+[0]+]). Bearing fruit is an essential requirement of Christian and ecclesial life. He who does not bear fruit does not remain in communion: "Every branch in me that does not bear fruit, ( [+[1]+] ) he cuts off" ( [+[2]+] ).

33
33. The lay faithful, precisely because they are members of the Church, have the vocation and mission of being announcers of the Gospel: they are enabled and committed to this task by the sacraments of Christian initiation and by the gifts of the Holy Spirit.

34
34. Entire countries and nations, in which religion and Christian life were once flourishing and capable of giving rise to communities of living and operational faith, are now severely tested and even occasionally radically transformed by the continued spread of indifferentism, secularism and atheism. These are, specifically, countries and nations of the so-called First World, in which economic well-being and consumerism - although intermixed with appalling situations of poverty and misery - inspire and sustain an existence lived "as if there were no God." Now, religious indifferentism and the total practical irrelevance of God to solve the problems, even serious ones, of life, are no less worrying and devastating than declared atheism. And also the Christian faith - although it survives in some traditional and ceremonial manifestations - tends to be uprooted from the most significant moments of human existence, such as the moments of birth, suffering and dying. From there comes the consolidation of questions and great enigmas, which, when left unanswered, expose contemporary man to inconsolable disappointments, or to the temptation to suppress the very human life that poses these problems.

35
35. The Church, while it warns and lives the current urgency of a new evangelization, cannot escape the perennial mission of bringing the Gospel to those - and there are millions and millions of men and women - who do not yet know Christ the Redeemer of man. This is the most specifically missionary responsibility that Jesus has entrusted and daily entrusts again to his Church.

36
36. By welcoming and announcing the Gospel with the power of the Spirit, the Church constitutes itself as an evangelized and evangelizing community and, precisely for this, it becomes a servant of men. In it, the lay faithful participate in the mission of serving people and society. It is true that the Church has as its supreme end the Kingdom of God, of which "it constitutes the germ and beginning on earth", and is, therefore, totally consecrated to the glorification of the Father. But the Kingdom is a source of full liberation and total salvation for men: with them, then, the Church walks and lives, truly and entirely in solidarity with its history.

37
37. Rediscovering and rediscovering the inviolable dignity of each human person constitutes an essential task; Furthermore, in a certain sense it is the central and unifying task of the service that the Church, and in it the lay faithful, are called to provide to the human family.

38
38. The effective recognition of the personal dignity of every human being requires respect, defense and promotion of the rights of the human person. These are natural, universal and inviolable rights. No one, neither the individual person, nor the group, nor the authority, nor the State can modify them, much less eliminate them, because such rights come from God himself.

39
39. Respect for personal dignity, which entails the defense and promotion of human rights, requires recognition of the religious dimension of man. This is not a simply "confessional" demand, but rather a demand that finds its inextricable root in the very reality of man. Indeed, the relationship with God is a constitutive element of man's very "being" and "existing": it is in God where we "live, move and exist" ([+[0]+]). If not everyone believes in that truth, those who are convinced of it have the right to be respected in their faith and in the choice of life, individual or community, that derives from it. This is the right to freedom of conscience and religious freedom, whose effective recognition is among the highest goods and most serious duties of every people who truly wants to ensure the good of the person and society. «Religious freedom, an irrepressible requirement of the dignity of every man, is a cornerstone of the edifice of human rights and, therefore, is an irreplaceable factor in the good of the person and of the entire society, as well as in the self-realization of each person. It follows that the freedom of individuals and communities to profess and practice their own religion is an essential element of the peaceful coexistence of men ( [+[1]+] ). The civil and social right to religious freedom, as soon as it reaches the most intimate sphere of the spirit, reveals itself as a point of reference and, in a certain way, becomes a measure of other fundamental rights.

40
40. The human person has a native and structural social dimension in that he is called, from the most intimate part of himself, to communion with others and to give himself to others: "God, who cares for everyone with paternal concern, wanted men to form a single family and treat each other with the spirit of brothers." And thus, society, the fruit and sign of man's sociability, reveals its full truth in being a community of people.

41
41. Service to society is manifested and carried out in diverse ways: from free and informal to institutional, from the help offered to the individual to that directed to diverse groups and communities of people.

42
42. Charity that loves and serves the person can never be separated from justice: both, each in its own way, demand the full effective recognition of the rights of the person, to whom society with all its structures and institutions is ordered.

43
43. The service to society by the lay faithful finds its essential moment in the economic-social issue, which has as its key the organization of work.

44
44. Service to the person and to human society is manifested and acted upon through the creation and transmission of culture, which especially in our days constitutes one of the most serious responsibilities of human coexistence and social evolution. In the light of the Council, we understand by "culture" all those "means with which man refines and develops his innumerable spiritual and physical qualities; He tries to subdue the terrestrial world itself with his knowledge and work; it makes social life more humane, both in the family and in civil society, through the progress of customs and institutions; Finally, over time, he expresses, communicates and preserves in his works great spiritual experiences and aspirations, so that they serve the progress of many, and even of the entire human race. In this sense, culture must be considered the common good of each people, the expression of their dignity, freedom and creativity, the testimony of their historical path. Specifically, only from within and through culture does the Christian faith become historical and the creator of history.

45
45. According to the Gospel parable, the "owner of the house" calls the workers to his vineyard at different times of the day: some at dawn, others around nine in the morning, still others at noon and three, the last around five ([+[0]+]). In the commentary on this page of the Gospel, Saint Gregory the Great interprets the various hours of the call by relating them to the ages of life. «It is possible – he writes – to apply the diversity of hours to the different ages of man. In this interpretation of ours, the morning can certainly represent childhood. Then, the third hour can be understood as adolescence: the sun rises high in the sky, that is, the ardor of age grows. The sixth hour is youth: the sun is as if in the middle of the sky, that is, at this age the fullness of vigor is reinforced. Old age represents the ninth hour, because as the sun declines from the top of its axis, so at this age the ardor of youth begins to lose. The eleventh hour is the age of those very advanced in years ([+[1]+]). The workers, therefore, are called to the vineyard at different times, as if to indicate that one is led to the holy life during childhood, another in youth, another in old age and another in the most advanced age. We can assume and expand on the commentary of Saint Gregory the Great in relation to the extraordinary variety of people present in the Church, each and every one called to work for the advent of the Kingdom of God, according to the diversity of vocations and situations, charismas and functions. It is a variety linked not only to age, but also to sex differences and the diversity of gifts, vocations and living conditions; It is a variety that makes the richness of the Church more alive and concrete.

46
46. ​​The Synod wanted to dedicate particular attention to young people. And rightly so. In so many countries of the world, they represent half of the entire population and, often, numerical half of the very People of God who live in those countries. From this aspect, young people constitute an exceptional force and are a great challenge for the future of the Church. Indeed, in young people the Church perceives its journey towards the future that awaits it and finds the image and call of that joyful youth, with which the Spirit of Christ incessantly enriches it. In this sense, the Council has defined young people as "the hope of the Church."

47
47. Children are, of course, the end of the delicate and generous love of Our Lord Jesus Christ: for them he reserves his blessing and, even more, he assures them the Kingdom of heaven ( [+[0]+] ). In particular, Jesus exalts the active role that children have in the Kingdom of God: they are the eloquent symbol and the splendid image of those moral and spiritual conditions, which are essential to enter the Kingdom of God and to live the logic of total abandonment in the Lord: «I assure you: if you do not change and become like children, you will not enter the Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore, whoever becomes small like this child, he is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. And whoever receives even one of these children in my name receives me” ( [+[1]+] ).

48
48. To the elderly - often unjustly considered useless, if not even an unbearable burden - I remember that the Church asks and expects them to know how to continue that apostolic and missionary mission, which is not only possible and obligatory at that age, but that same age makes it, in a certain way, specific and original.

49
49. The Synod Fathers have dedicated particular attention to the condition and role of women, with a double intention: to recognize, and invite everyone to recognize once again, the indispensable contribution of women to the building of the Church and the development of society; and also, analyze more specifically the participation of women in the life and mission of the Church.

50
50. The condition for ensuring the just presence of women in the Church and in society is a more penetrating and careful consideration of the anthropological foundations of the masculine and feminine condition, aimed at specifying the personal identity of women in their relationship of diversity and reciprocal complementarity with men, not only with regard to the roles to be assumed and the functions to be performed, but also, and more profoundly, with regard to their structure and personal meaning. The Synod Fathers have keenly felt this demand, stating that "the anthropological and theological foundations need profound studies to resolve the problems relating to the true meaning and dignity of the two sexes."

51
51. Next, regarding participation in the apostolic mission of the Church, there is no doubt that "by virtue of Baptism and Confirmation," the woman, as well as the man, is made a participant in the triple office of Jesus Christ Priest, Prophet, King; and, therefore, it is enabled and committed to the fundamental apostolate of the Church: evangelization. On the other hand, precisely in carrying out this apostolate, women are called to exercise their own "gifts": firstly, the gift of their own personal dignity, through the word and the testimony of life; and then the gifts related to her feminine vocation.

52
52. In the synodal hall there has been no shortage of voices who have expressed the fear that excessive insistence focused on the condition and role of women could lead to an unacceptable forgetfulness: that of men. In reality, various ecclesial situations have to lament the absence or very scarce presence of men, of whom a part abdicates their own ecclesial responsibilities, leaving them to be assumed only by women, such as, for example, participation in liturgical prayer in the church, education and specifically the catechism of their own children and other children, presence in religious and cultural meetings, collaboration in charitable and missionary initiatives.

53
53. Man is called to joy, but he experiences so many forms of suffering and pain daily. In their final Message, the Synod Fathers addressed the men and women affected by the most diverse forms of suffering and pain with these words: “You, those abandoned and marginalized by our consumerist society; you, the sick, the disabled, the poor, the hungry, emigrants, fugitives, prisoners, the unemployed, the elderly, abandoned children and lonely people; You, victims of war and of all violence that emanates from our permissive society: the Church participates in your suffering that leads to the Lord, who associates you with his redeeming Passion and makes you live in the light of his Redemption. We count on you to teach the whole world what love is. "We will do everything possible so that you find the place to which you have the right in society and in the Church."

54
54. It is necessary that this most precious inheritance, which the Church has received from Jesus Christ "doctor of the flesh and the spirit", not only never diminishes, but is increasingly valued and enriched through a recovery and a determined relaunch of pastoral action for and with the sick and suffering. It must be an action capable of sustaining and promoting attention, closeness, presence, listening, dialogue, participation and concrete help for man, in moments when illness and suffering severely test not only his trust in life, but also his very faith in God and in his Father's love. This pastoral relaunch has its most significant expression in the sacramental celebration with and for the sick, as strength in pain and weakness, as hope in despair, as a place of meeting and celebration.

55
55. Workers in the vineyard are all the members of the People of God: the priests, the religious men and women, the lay faithful, all at the same time the object and subject of the communion of the Church and of participation in its mission of salvation. Each and every one of us works in the one and common vineyard of the Lord with diverse and complementary charismas and ministries.

56
56. The rich variety of the Church finds its further manifestation within each of the states of life. Thus, within the state of lay life there are various "vocations", that is, various spiritual and apostolic paths that affect each of the lay faithful. In the vein of a “common” lay vocation, “particular” lay vocations flourish. In this field we can also remember the spiritual experience that has recently matured in the Church with the flourishing of various forms of secular Institutes. The possibility of professing the evangelical counsels of poverty, chastity and obedience through vows or promises, fully preserving one's lay or clerical condition, is open to the lay faithful, and also to the priests themselves. As the Synod Fathers have shown, "the Holy Spirit also promotes other forms of self-giving to which people who remain fully in lay life dedicate themselves."

57
57. The evangelical image of the vine and the branches reveals to us another fundamental aspect of the life and mission of the lay faithful: The call to grow, to continually mature, to always bear more fruit.

58
58. The fundamental objective of the formation of the lay faithful is the increasingly clear discovery of one's own vocation and the ever greater availability to live it in the fulfillment of one's mission.

59
59. In discovering and living their own vocation and mission, the lay faithful must be formed to live that unity with which their very being as members of the Church and citizens of human society is marked.

60
60. Within this synthesis of life are located the multiple and coordinated aspects of the integral formation of the lay faithful.

61
61. What are the places and means of the Christian formation of the lay faithful? Who are the people and communities called to assume the task of the integral and unitary formation of the lay faithful?

62
62. The Christian family, as the "domestic Church", also constitutes the primary and fundamental school for the formation of faith. In the sacrament of Marriage, father and mother receive the grace and responsibility of Christian education in relation to their children, to whom they simultaneously witness and transmit human and religious values. By learning the first words, children also learn to praise God, whom they feel close to as a loving and provident Father; By learning the first gestures of love, children also learn to open themselves to others, capturing in their own dedication the meaning of human living. The daily life of an authentically Christian family constitutes the first "Church experience", destined to be corroborated and developed in the gradual active and responsible insertion of the children into the broader ecclesial community and into civil society. The more the awareness grows in Christian husbands and parents that their "domestic church" is a participant in the life and mission of the universal Church, the more their children will be able to be formed in the "sense of the Church" and will feel all the beauty of dedicating their energies to the service of the Kingdom of God.

63
63. Training is not the privilege of some, but a right and duty of all. In this regard, the Synod Fathers have said: "The possibility of formation be offered to everyone, especially the poor, who can be 'themselves' a source of formation for all", and they have added: "For formation, appropriate means are used that help each one to realize the full human and Christian vocation."

64
64. As a conclusion to this post-synodal document, I address you, once again, the invitation of the "owner of the house" that the Gospel tells us about: Go you too to my vineyard. It can be said that the meaning of the Synod on the vocation and mission of the laity lies precisely in this call of Our Lord Jesus Christ addressed to everyone, and, in particular, to the lay faithful, men and women.
