1
1. We close with this solemn liturgy both the commemoration of the 19th centenary of the martyrdom of the holy apostles Peter and Paul and the year that we have called of faith. Well, we have dedicated this year to commemorating the holy apostles, not only with the intention of testifying to our unbreakable will to preserve in its entirety the deposit of faith ( [+[0]+] ), which they transmitted to us, but also to strengthen our purpose of carrying the. same faith to life in this time in which the Church has to pilgrimage in this world.

2
2. We think that it is now our duty to publicly express our gratitude to those faithful Christians who, responding to our invitations, made the so-called year of faith obtain an abundance of fruits, either by giving a deeper adherence to the word of God, or by renewing the profession of faith in many communities, or by confirming the faith itself with clear testimonies of Christian life. Therefore, while we express our recognition, especially to our brothers in the episcopate and to all the children of the Catholic Church, we grant them our apostolic blessing.

3
3. We further judge that we must fulfill the mandate entrusted by Christ to Peter, whose successor, although much inferior in merit, we are; namely: that we confirm our brothers in the faith ( [+[0]+] ). Therefore, although we are aware of our smallness, with that immense strength of mind that we draw from the mandate that has been given to us, we are going to make a profession of faith and pronounce a formula that begins with the word I believe, which, although it should not be called a truly and properly dogmatic definition, nevertheless substantially repeats, with some explanations postulated by the spiritual conditions of this our age, the Nicene formula: that is, the formula of the immortal tradition of the holy Church of God.

4
4. We know well, in doing this, by what disturbances some groups of men are agitated today, regarding faith. Which did not escape the influence of a world that is being completely transformed, in which so many truths are either completely denied or put into discussion. Furthermore: we even see some Catholics as captives of a certain desire to change or innovate. The Church judges that it is her obligation not to interrupt efforts to penetrate more and more into the profound mysteries of God, from which so many fruits of salvation flow for all, and, at the same time, to propose them to the men of successive eras every day in a more suitable way. But, at the same time, great care must be taken so that, while carrying out this necessary duty of investigation, truths of Christian doctrine are not demolished. If this were to happen - and we painfully see that it is actually happening today - it would bring disturbance and doubt to the faithful minds of many.

5
5. In this regard, it is of utmost importance to note that, in addition to what is observable and what is discovered through the sciences, intelligence, which has been given to us by God, can reach what is, not only the subjective meanings of what they call structures, or the evolution of human consciousness. For the rest, we must remember that it belongs to interpretation or hermeneutics that, paying attention to the word that has been pronounced, we strive to understand and discern the meaning contained in such a text, but not to innovate, in a certain way, this meaning, according to the arbitrariness of a conjecture.

6
6. However, above all, we must firmly trust in the Holy Spirit, who is the soul of the Church, and in theological faith, on which the life of the mystical Body rests. Certainly not ignoring that men expect the words of the Vicar of Christ, we therefore satisfy their expectation with speeches and homilies, which we like to have very frequently. But today we are offered the opportunity to utter a more solemn word.

7
7. So, on this day, chosen by Us to close the so-called year of faith, and in this celebration of the holy apostles Peter and Paul, We want to lend to God, supreme and living, the gift of the profession of faith. And as in another time, in Caesarea Philippi, Simon Peter, beyond the opinions of men, truly confessed, in the name of the twelve apostles, Christ, Son of the living God, so today his humble Successor and Pastor of the universal Church, in the name of all the people of God, raises his voice to give a very firm testimony to the divine Truth, which has been entrusted to the Church to announce to all people.

8
8. We believe in one God, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Creator of visible things - such as this world in which we spend our brief life - and of invisible things - such as pure spirits, which we also call angels - and also Creator, in each man, of the spiritual and immortal soul.

9
9. We believe that this one God is as absolutely one in his most holy essence as in all his other perfections: in his omnipotence, in his infinite science, in his providence, in his will and charity. He is who is, as he himself revealed to Moses ( [+[0]+] ), he is Love, as the apostle John taught us ( [+[1]+] ) in such a way that these two names, Being and Love, ineffably express the same divine essence of the one who wanted to manifest himself to us and who, inhabiting the inaccessible light ( [+[2]+] ), is in himself above every name and above all created things and intelligences. Only God can grant us a right and full knowledge of himself, revealing himself as Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in whose eternal life we ​​are called by grace to participate, here, on earth, in the darkness of faith, and after death, in the everlasting light. The mutual bonds that constitute the three persons from all eternity, each of whom is the one and the same divine Being, are the intimate and blissful life of the most holy God, which infinitely surpasses everything that we can understand in a human way.

10
10. We believe, then, in God, who in all eternity begets the Son; we believe in the Son, Word of God, who is begotten from eternity; We believe in the Holy Spirit, an uncreated person, who proceeds from the Father and the Son as their everlasting Love. Thus, in the three divine persons, who are eternal among themselves and equal to each other, the life and happiness of God wholly one abound exceedingly and are consummated with supreme excellence and glory proper to the uncreated essence; and we must always venerate the unity in the trinity and the trinity in the unity.

11
11. We believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God. He is the eternal Word, born of the Father before all ages and consubstantial with the Father, or homoousios to Patri; by whom all things were made. And he was incarnated by the Holy Spirit, of Mary the Virgin, and became man: equal, therefore, to the Father according to divinity, less than the Father according to humanity, completely one, not by confusion ( [+[0]+] ) of the substance, but by unity of the person.

12
12. He himself dwelt among us full of grace and truth. He announced and founded the kingdom of God, manifesting the Father to us in himself. He gave us his new commandment to love one another as he loved us. He taught us the way of the evangelical beatitudes, namely: to be poor in spirit and meek, to tolerate pain with patience, to thirst for justice, to be merciful, pure of heart, peaceful, to suffer persecution for justice. He suffered under Pontius Pilate; Lamb of God, who bears the sins of the world, died for us nailed to the cross, bringing us salvation with the blood of redemption. He was buried, and rose again by his own power on the third day, raising us by his resurrection to the participation of the divine life, which is grace. He ascended to heaven, from where he will come again, then with glory, to judge the living and the dead, each according to his own merits: those who have responded to the love and mercy of God will go to eternal life, but those who have rejected them until the end will be destined for the fire that will never cease.

13
13. We believe in the Holy Spirit, Lord and life-giver, who, with the Father and the Son, is jointly adored and glorified. Who spoke through the prophets; It was sent to us by Christ after his resurrection and ascension to the Father; It illuminates, vivifies, protects and governs the Church, whose members it purifies as long as they do not reject grace. Its action, which penetrates the depths of the soul, makes man capable of responding to that precept of Christ: Be perfect as your heavenly Father is also perfect ([+[0]+]).

14
14. We believe that the Blessed Mary, who always remained a Virgin, was the Mother of the incarnate Word, God and our Savior, Jesus Christ and that she, by her singular election, in attention to the merits of her Son redeemed in a more sublime way, was preserved immune from every stain of original guilt and that she far surpasses in the gift of grace she exempted all other creatures.

15
15. Bound by a close and indissoluble bond to the mystery of the incarnation and redemption, the Blessed Virgin Mary, Immaculate, having completed the course of earthly life, was assumed body and soul into celestial glory, and made similar to her Son, who rose from the dead, received in advance the fate of all the just; We believe that the Most Holy Mother of God, new Eve, Mother of the Church, continues in heaven exercising her maternal office with respect to the members of Christ, through which she contributes to engender and increase divine life in each of the souls of redeemed men.

16
16. We believe that all sinned in Adam; which means that the original fault committed by him caused nature, common to all men, to fall into such a state in which he suffered the consequences of that fault. This state is no longer that in which human nature was at the beginning in our first parents, since they were constituted in holiness and justice, and in which man was exempt from evil and death. Thus, then, this human nature, fallen in this way, destitute of the gift of grace with which it was previously adorned, wounded in its very natural forces and subjected to the empire of death, is given to all men; Therefore, in this sense, every man is born in sin. We maintain, therefore, following the Council of Trent, that original sin is transmitted, together with human nature, by propagation, not by imitation, and that it is found as its own in each one.

17
17. We believe that our Lord Jesus Christ redeemed us, by the sacrifice of the cross, from original sin and from all the personal sins committed by each one of us, so that the Apostle's statement remains true: Where sin abounded, grace abounded all the more ( [+[0]+] ).

18
18. We confess, believing in one baptism instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins. That baptism must also be conferred on children, who have not yet been able to commit any sin on their own, so that, deprived of supernatural grace at birth, they are born again, of water and the Holy Spirit, to divine life in Christ Jesus.

19
19. We believe in the one, holy, catholic and apostolic Church, built by Jesus Christ on the rock, which is Peter. She is the mystical Body of Christ, a visible society, equipped with hierarchical organs, and, at the same time, a spiritual community; Terrestrial Church, People of God pilgrim here on earth and Church enriched by heavenly goods, germ and beginning of the kingdom of God, by which the work and sufferings of redemption continue throughout human history, and which longs with all its strength for the perfect consummation, which must be achieved after the end of time in heavenly glory. During the course of time, the Lord Jesus forms his Church through the sacraments, which flow from his fullness. Because the Church makes its members participate in the mystery of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, through the grace of the Holy Spirit, who gives life and moves it. It is, therefore, holy, although it includes sinners within it, because it enjoys no other life than the life of grace; Its members, indeed, if they feed on this life, become sanctified; If they depart from it, they contract sins and stains of the soul that prevent its holiness from spreading radiantly. Therefore he grieves and does penance for those sins, having the power to free his children from them through the blood of Christ and the gift of the Holy Spirit.

20
20. Heir of the divine promises and daughter of Abraham according to the Spirit, through that Israel, whose sacred books she preserves with love and whose patriarchs and prophets she venerates with piety; built on the foundation of the apostles, whose ever-living word and whose own shepherding powers it faithfully transmits through the centuries in the Successor of Peter and in the bishops who maintain communion with him; finally enjoying the perpetual assistance of the Holy Spirit, the Church has the mission of preserving, teaching, explaining and disseminating that truth which, outlined to a certain extent by the prophets, God revealed to men fully through the Lord Jesus. We believe all those things that are contained in the written or transmitted word of God and are proposed by the Church, either with solemn judgment, or with ordinary and universal magisterium, to be believed as divinely revealed. We believe in that infallibility that the Successor of Peter enjoys when he speaks ex cathedra and that also resides in the Body of bishops when he exercises the supreme magisterium with it.

21
21. We believe that the Church, which Christ founded and prayed for, is unceasingly one through faith, and worship, and the bond of hierarchical communion. The abundant variety of liturgical rites within this Church or the legitimate difference in theological and spiritual heritage and peculiar disciplines not only do not harm its unity, but rather manifest it.

22
22. We too, recognizing on the one hand that outside the structure of the Church of Christ there are many elements of sanctification and truth, which as gifts proper to the Church itself push towards Catholic unity, and believing, on the other hand, in the action of the Holy Spirit, who awakens in all the disciples of Christ the desire for this unity, we hope that Christians who do not yet enjoy the full communion of the one Church will finally be united in a single flock with a single Shepherd.

23
23. We believe that the Church is necessary for salvation. Because only Christ is the Mediator and the way of salvation that, in his Body, which is the Church, is made present to us. But the divine purpose of salvation embraces all men: and those who, blamelessly ignorant of the Gospel of Christ and his Church, nevertheless seek God with a sincere heart and strive, under the influence of grace, to fulfill in works his will, known by the dictates of conscience, they too, in a number certainly known only to God, can obtain eternal salvation.

24
24. We believe that the mass that is celebrated by the priest representing the person of Christ, by virtue of the power received by the sacrament of orders, and that is offered by him in the name of Christ and the members of his mystical Body, is really the sacrifice of Calvary, which becomes sacramentally present on our altars. We believe that, as the bread and wine consecrated by the Lord at the Last Supper became his body and blood, which were then to be offered by us on the cross, so also the bread and wine consecrated by the priest become the body and blood of Christ, seated gloriously in heaven; and we believe that the mysterious presence of the Lord under the appearance of those things, which continue to appear to our senses in the same way as before, is true, real and substantial.

25
25. In this sacrament, Christ cannot be present in any other way than by the conversion of the entire substance of the bread into his body and the conversion of the entire substance of the wine into his blood, only the properties of the bread and wine remaining intact, which we perceive with our senses. Which mysterious conversion is called by the Holy Church conveniently and properly transubstantiation. Any interpretation of theologians that seeks some understanding of this mystery, so that it agrees with the Catholic faith, must state that, in the very nature of things, independently of our spirit, the bread and wine, once the consecration is completed, have ceased to exist, so that the adorable body and blood of Christ, after it, are truly present before us under the sacramental species of bread and wine, as the Lord himself intended, to be given to us as food and unite us in the unity of his mystical Body. .

26
26. The one and indivisible existence of Christ, the glorious Lord in heaven, is not multiplied, but through the sacrament it is made present in the various places on earth, where the Eucharistic sacrifice is performed. The same existence, after the sacrifice has been celebrated, remains present in the Most Holy Sacrament, which, in the tabernacle of the altar, is like the living heart of our temples. Therefore we are obliged, by an certainly most gentle obligation, to honor and adore in the Holy Host that our eyes see, the same incarnate Word that they cannot see, and that, however, has been present before us without having left the heavens.

27
27. We also confess that the kingdom of God, which had its beginnings here on earth in the Church of Christ, is not of this world ([+[0]+]), whose figure passes ([+[1]+]), and also that its own growth cannot be judged identical to the progress of the culture of humanity or of the sciences or technical arts, but rather consists in knowing more and more deeply the unfathomable riches of Christ, in which he puts himself more and more with greater constancy the hope in eternal goods, in which the love of God is responded to more and more ardently; finally, in which grace and holiness spread more and more abundantly among men. But with the same love the Church is driven to continually be interested also in the true temporal good of men. Because, while he does not cease to admonish all his children who do not have a permanent city here on earth ( [+[2]+] ), he also encourages them, each according to their condition of life and resources, to encourage the development of the human city itself, promote justice, peace and fraternal harmony among men and provide help to their brothers, especially the poorest and most unhappy. Therefore, the great care with which the Church, Bride of Christ, closely follows the needs of men, that is, their joys and hopes, pains and labors, is nothing other than the desire that vehemently impels her to be present to them, certainly with the will to illuminate men with the light of Christ, and to gather and unite all in him who is their only Savior. But this request should never be interpreted as if the Church were accommodating herself to the things of this world or cooling off the ardor with which she awaits her Lord and the eternal kingdom.

28
28. We believe in eternal life. We believe that the souls of all those who die in the grace of Christ - both those who have yet to be purified with the fire of purgatory and those who are received by Jesus in paradise as soon as they are separated from the body, like the Good Thief - constitute the People of God after death, which will be totally destroyed on the day of resurrection, in which these souls will be united with their bodies.

29
29. We believe that the multitude of those souls who gather with Jesus and Mary in paradise form the heavenly Church, where they, enjoying eternal blessedness, see God as He is and also participate, certainly in varying degrees and ways, together with the holy angels, in the divine government of things, exercised by the glorified Christ, as they intercede for us and with their fraternal concern greatly help our weakness.

30
30. We believe in the communion of all the Christian faithful, that is, those who pilgrimage on earth, those who are purified after death and those who enjoy heavenly blessedness, and that all are united in a single Church; and we also believe that in that communion the merciful love of God and his saints is at our disposal, who always offer attentive ears to our prayers, as Jesus assured us: Ask and you will receive ( [+[0]+] ). Professing this faith and supported by this hope, we await the resurrection of the dead and the life of the age to come.
