1
1. The very serious duty of transmitting human life has always been for spouses, free and responsible collaborators of God the Creator, a source of great joy, although sometimes accompanied by many difficulties and anguish.

2
2. The changes that have occurred are, in fact, notable and of diverse nature. This is, above all, rapid demographic development. Many express the fear that the world population will increase more rapidly than the reserves available to it, with growing anguish for so many families and developing peoples, with the temptation for authorities to oppose this danger with radical measures being great. Furthermore, working and housing conditions and the multiple demands that are increasing in the economic and educational fields, today often make it difficult to adequately support a large number of children.

3
3. The new state of affairs raises new questions. Considering the conditions of today's life and given the meaning that marital relations have in terms of harmony between spouses and their mutual fidelity, would it not be appropriate to review the ethical norms hitherto in force, especially if it is considered that they cannot be observed without sacrifices, sometimes heroic ones?

4
4. These questions demanded from the Magisterium of the Church a new and profound reflection on the principles of the moral doctrine of marriage, a doctrine founded on natural law, illuminated and enriched by divine Revelation.

5
5. The awareness of this same mission led us to confirm and expand the Study Commission that our predecessor John XXIII, of happy memory, had established in the month of March 1963. This Commission, which included many scholars from the various disciplines related to the subject and married couples, had the purpose of collecting opinions on new issues relating to married life, in particular the regulation of birth rates, and of providing timely elements of information, so that the Magisterium could give an adequate response to the expectations of the faithful and world public opinion.

6
6. We could not, however, consider the conclusions reached by the Commission as definitive, nor exempt ourselves from personally examining the serious question; among other reasons, because within the Commission a full agreement of judgments had not been reached regarding the moral norms to be proposed and, above all, because some criteria for solutions had emerged that were separated from the moral doctrine on marriage proposed by the Magisterium of the Church with constant firmness. Therefore, having carefully examined the documentation presented to us and after mature reflection and assiduous prayers, we now want, by virtue of the mandate that Christ entrusted to us, to give our response to these serious questions.

7
7. The problem of birth rate, like any other problem related to human life, must be considered, above the partial perspectives of a biological or psychological, demographic or sociological order, in the light of a comprehensive vision of man and his vocation, not only natural and earthly but also supernatural and eternal. And since, in the attempt to justify the artificial methods of birth control, many have appealed to the demands of conjugal love and "responsible parenthood", it is important to clarify well the true concept of these two great realities of married life, referring above all to what the Second Vatican Council has declared, in a highly authoritative manner, in this regard in the Pastoral Constitution Gaudium et Spes.

8
8. The true nature and nobility of conjugal love are revealed when it is considered in its supreme source, God, who is Love, "the Father from whom all fatherhood in heaven and on earth comes."

9
9. In this light the characteristic notes and demands of conjugal love clearly appear, and it is of utmost importance to have an exact idea of them.

10
10. For this reason, conjugal love demands from spouses an awareness of their mission of "responsible parenthood" on which so much is rightly insisted today and which must be understood exactly. It must be considered under various legitimate and interrelated aspects.

11
11. These acts, with which spouses are united in chaste intimacy, and through which human life is transmitted, are, as the Council has recalled, "honest and dignified", and do not cease to be legitimate if, for reasons independent of the will of the spouses, they are foreseen to be infertile, because they continue to be ordered to express and consolidate their union. In fact, as experience attests, a new life does not follow from each of the marital acts. God has wisely established laws and natural rhythms of fertility that by themselves distance births. The Church, however, by demanding that men observe the norms of natural law interpreted by its constant doctrine, teaches that any marital act ([+[0]+]) must remain open to the transmission of life.

12
12. This doctrine, often expounded by the Magisterium, is based on the inseparable connection that God has willed and that man cannot break on his own initiative, between the two meanings of the conjugal act: the unitive meaning and the procreative meaning.

13
13. It is rightly noted that a marital act imposed on the spouse without considering his or her current condition and legitimate desires is not a true act of love; and therefore dispenses with a requirement of the right moral order in the relations between spouses. Thus, whoever reflects correctly must also recognize that an act of reciprocal love, which prejudges the willingness to transmit the life that God the Creator, according to particular laws, has placed in him, is in contradiction with the constitutive design of marriage and with the will of the Author of life. To use this divine gift by destroying its meaning and purpose, even only partially, is to contradict the nature of man and woman and their most intimate relationships, and for the same reason it is also to contradict God's plan and his will. To use, on the other hand, the gift of conjugal love while respecting the laws of the generative process means recognizing oneself not as arbiters of the sources of human life, but rather as administrators of the plan established by the Creator. In fact, just as man does not have unlimited control over his body in general, in the same way he does not have unlimited control over the generative faculties as such, by virtue of their intrinsic order to originate life, of which God is the principle. "Human life is sacred," recalled John XXIII, "; from its beginning, it directly compromises the creative action of God."

14
14. In accordance with these fundamental principles of the human and Christian vision of marriage, we must once again declare that the direct interruption of the generative process already begun, and above all abortion directly desired and procured, even for therapeutic reasons, must be absolutely excluded as a licit means of regulating births.

15
15. The Church, on the other hand, does not in any way illicitly hold back the use of therapeutic means truly necessary to cure diseases of the organism, despite the fact that an impediment, even foreseen, to procreation occurs, as long as this impediment is not, for any reason, directly intended.

16
16. The objection to these teachings of the Church on conjugal morality today, as we observed before ( [+[0]+] ), is that it is the prerogative of human intelligence to dominate the energies of irrational nature and direct them towards an end in accordance with the good of man. Some wonder: currently, is it not perhaps rational to resort in many circumstances to artificial control of births, if this results in harmony and tranquility in the family and better conditions for the education of children already born? This question must be answered clearly: the Church is the first to praise and recommend the intervention of intelligence in a work that so closely associates the rational creature with its Creator, but affirms that this must be done respecting the order established by God.

17
17. Upright men will still be able to convince themselves of the consistency of the Church's doctrine in this field if they reflect on the consequences of the methods of artificial birth regulation. Consider, first of all, the easy and broad path that would open to marital infidelity and the general degradation of morality. It does not take much experience to know human weakness and to understand that men, especially young men, so vulnerable at this point, need encouragement to be faithful to the moral law and should not be offered any easy means to circumvent its observance. It could also be feared that the man, becoming accustomed to the use of contraceptive practices, would end up losing respect for the woman and, without worrying more about her physical and psychological balance, would come to consider her as a simple instrument of selfish enjoyment and not as a companion, respected and loved.

18
18. It can be foreseen that these teachings may not be easily accepted by everyone: there are too many voices âamplified by modern propaganda mediaâ that are in contrast to the Church. To tell the truth, it does not marvel at being, like its divine Founder, a "sign of contradiction", but it does not stop proclaiming with humble firmness the entire moral, natural and evangelical law.

19
19. Our word would not be an adequate expression of the thoughts and requests of the Church, Mother and Teacher of all people, if, after having invited men to observe and respect the divine law regarding marriage, it did not comfort them on the path of an honest regulation of birth rates, even in the midst of the difficult conditions that today afflict families and peoples. The Church, in fact, cannot have any other attitude towards men than that of the Redeemer: it knows their weakness, it has compassion for the crowds, it welcomes sinners, but it cannot renounce teaching the law which in reality is that of a human life brought to its original truth and led by the Spirit of God.

21
21. An honest practice of birth control requires, above all, that spouses acquire and possess solid convictions about the true values of life and family, and also a tendency to seek perfect self-control. The mastery of instinct, through reason and free will, imposes without any doubt an asceticism, so that the emotional manifestations of married life are in accordance with the right order and particularly to observe periodic continence. This discipline, typical of the purity of spouses, far from harming conjugal love, gives it a more sublime human value. It requires continuous effort, but, by virtue of its beneficial influence, spouses fully develop their personalities, enriching themselves with spiritual values: bringing fruits of serenity and peace to family life and facilitating the solution of other problems; favoring attention towards the other spouse; helping to overcome selfishness, the enemy of true love, and further rooting their sense of responsibility. Parents thus acquire the capacity for a deeper and more effective influence in educating their children; Children and young people grow in the right appreciation of human values ​​and in the serene and harmonious development of their spiritual and sensitive faculties.

22
22. On this occasion we want to draw the attention of educators and all those who have responsibility, in order for the common good of human coexistence, to the need to create a climate favorable to the education of chastity, that is, to the triumph of freedom over debauchery, through respect for the moral order.

23
23. We say to the rulers, who are primarily responsible for the common good and who can do so much to safeguard moral customs: do not allow the morality of your people to degrade; Do not accept that practices contrary to natural and divine law are legally introduced into the fundamental cell, which is the family. There is another path by which public powers can and should contribute to the solution of the demographic problem: that of a careful family policy and a wise education of the people, which respects the moral law and the freedom of citizens.

24
24. We now want to encourage men of science, who "can contribute significantly to the good of marriage and the family and to the peace of conscience if, by combining their studies, they propose to clarify more deeply the various conditions favorable to an honest regulation of human procreation." It is to be particularly hoped that, according to the hope already expressed by Pius XII, medical science will be able to provide a sufficiently secure basis for a regulation of births, based on the observance of natural rhythms. In this way, scientists, and especially Catholics, will contribute to demonstrating with facts that, as the Church teaches, "there can be no true contradiction between the divine laws that regulate the transmission of life and those that favor authentic conjugal love."

25
25. Our word is now addressed more directly to our children, particularly those called by God to serve Him in marriage. The Church, at the same time that it teaches the imprescriptible demands of the divine law, announces salvation and opens with the sacraments the paths of grace, which makes man a new creature, capable of corresponding in love and true freedom to the plan of his Creator and Savior, and of finding the yoke of Christ gentle.

26
26. Among the fruits achieved with a generous effort of fidelity to divine law, one of the most precious is that spouses often feel the desire to communicate their experience to others. A new and very important form of apostolate among peers is thus inserted into the broad framework of the vocation of the laity: the spouses themselves become guides for other spouses. This is, without a doubt, among the numerous forms of apostolate, one of those that appear most appropriate today.

27
27. We highly esteem doctors and members of health personnel, who in the exercise of their profession deeply feel the superior demands of their Christian vocation, above all human interest. Persevere, therefore, in constantly promoting solutions inspired by faith and right reason, and strive to foster conviction and respect for them in your environment. They also consider it their own professional duty to obtain all the necessary science in this delicate aspect, in order to be able to give the spouses who consult them wise advice and sound guidelines that they rightly expect from them.

28
28. Beloved priest sons, who are by vocation the counselors and spiritual directors of people and families, we want to turn to you now with all confidence. Your first business – especially that of those who teach moral theology – is to unambiguously state the Church's doctrine on marriage. Be the first to set an example of loyal gift, internally and externally, to the Magisterium of the Church in the exercise of your ministry. Such a gift, you well know, is obligatory not only for the reasons given, but above all because of the light of the Holy Spirit, with which the pastors of the Church are particularly assisted to illustrate the truth. You also know the utmost importance for the peace of consciences and for the unity of the Christian people, that in the field of morality and dogma everyone adheres to the Magisterium of the Church and speaks in the same way. For this reason we renew with all our heart the anguished appeal of the Apostle Paul: "I beseech you, brothers, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak equally, and that there be no schisms among you, but that you be of one mind in the same mind and in the same mind."

29
29. Not to undermine in any way the healthy doctrine of Christ is an eminent form of charity towards souls. But this must always be accompanied by patience and kindness, which the Lord himself gave as an example in his dealings with men. Coming not to judge but to save, He was certainly intransigent with evil, but merciful with people.

30
30. Dear and venerable brothers in the episcopate, with whom we share more closely the concern for the spiritual good of the People of God, our reverent and affectionate thoughts go to you at the end of this encyclical. We address a pressing invitation to all. Work in front of the priests, your collaborators, and your faithful with ardor and without rest for the safeguarding and sanctity of marriage so that it is lived in all its human and Christian fullness. Consider this mission as one of your most urgent responsibilities in the current time. This involves, as you know, pastoral action, coordinated in all fields of human, economic, cultural and social activity; In fact, only by improving all these sectors simultaneously, can the life of parents and children within the family be made not only tolerable but easier and happier, coexistence in human society more fraternal and peaceful, faithfully respecting God's plan for the world.

31
31. Venerable brothers, beloved children and all of you, men of good will: The work of education, progress and love to which we call you is great, based on the doctrine of the Church, of which the Successor of Peter is, with his brothers in the episcopate, depositary and interpreter. A great work of truth, we are convinced of it, both for the world and for the Church, since man cannot find true happiness, to which he aspires with his entire being, except in respect for the laws engraved by God in his nature and which he must observe with intelligence and love. We invoke on this task, as on all of you and in particular on spouses, the abundance of the graces of the God of holiness and mercy, as a pledge of which we grant you our apostolic blessing.
