1
1. And some who came down from Judea taught the brothers: "Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved."

2
2. Therefore, Paul and Barnabas having no small dissension against them, they resolved that Paul and Barnabas and some others among them should go up to the Apostles and presbyters in Jerusalem regarding this question.

3
3. They, then, sent by the Church, crossed Phenicia and Samaria, narrating the conversion of the Gentiles, and caused great joy to all the brothers.

4
4. When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were received by the Church and by the Apostles and elders, announcing how much God had done with them.

5
5. But some of the sect of the Pharisees who had believed stood up, saying, "They must be circumcised and commanded to keep the law of Moses."

6
6. And the Apostles and elders gathered together to consider this matter.

7
7. After a great discussion, Peter stood up and said to them: “Men and brothers, you know that from ancient times God chose among us that through my mouth the Gentiles should hear the word of the Gospel and believe.

8
8. And God, who knows the hearts, bore witness to them, giving them the Holy Spirit just as he gave us,

9
9. and made no distinction between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith.

10
10. Now then, why do you put God to the test by imposing a yoke on the necks of the disciples that neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?

11
11. But by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we believe we are saved, just as they are.

12
12. Then all the crowd was silent, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul, who told how many signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.

13
13. And after they were silent, James answered, saying, “Men and brothers, listen to me.

14
14. Simon has told how God first visited the Gentiles to take from among them a people for his name.

15
15. And with this the words of the Prophets agree, as it is written:

16
16. “After this I will return and rebuild the tabernacle of David, which is fallen, and I will rebuild its ruins, and raise it up,

17
17. so that the rest of men may seek the Lord, and all the nations who are called by my name, says the Lord who does these things.

18
18. His work is known to the Lord from eternity.”

19
19. Therefore I judge that those who turn to God from among the Gentiles should not be troubled,

20
20. But let it be written to them to abstain from defilements of idols, from fornication, from things strangled, and from blood.

21
21. Because Moses from ancient times has had someone in every city who preaches it in the synagogues, where it is read every Saturday.

22
22. Then it seemed good to the Apostles and the elders, with the whole Church, to choose some men from among them and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas, called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men among the brothers,

23
23. writing by their hand: “The Apostles and the elderly brothers, to the brothers among the Gentiles who are in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia: greetings.

24
24. Because we have heard that some from among us have troubled you with words, troubling your souls, whom we did not command,

25
25. It seemed good to us, united as one, to choose men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,

26
26. men who have given their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

27
27. Therefore we have sent Judas and Silas, who will also tell you the same thing by word of mouth.

28
28. Because it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to impose any burden on you other than these necessary things:

29
29. that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication; of which things if you keep yourselves, you will do well. Have a good time."

30
30. So they dismissed and went down to Antioch; and when the crowd was gathered, they delivered the letter.

31
31. Which, when read, they rejoiced at the consolation.

32
32. Judas and Silas, since they were also prophets, consoled the brothers with abundant words and confirmed them.

33
33. And after some time there, they were sent away in peace by the brothers to whom they had been sent.

34
34. But it seemed good to Silas to stay there; Judas alone went to Jerusalem.

35
35. Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and evangelizing the word of the Lord with many others.

36
36. After a few days, Paul said to Barnabas, "Let us return to visit the brothers in all the cities where we have preached the word of the Lord, how they are."

37
37. Barnabas also wanted to take John, called Mark, with him.

38
38. But Paul begged that he would not be received (as one who had departed from them since Pamphylia and had not gone with them to the work).

39
39. There was such a dissension that they separated from each other; and Barnabas, taking Mark, sailed to Cyprus.

40
40. Paul, however, choosing Silas, departed, commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord.

41
41. And he traveled through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches, ordering to keep the precepts of the Apostles and the elders.
