1
1. The mystery of faith, that is, the ineffable gift of the Eucharist, which the Catholic Church has received from Christ, her Spouse, as a pledge of her immense love, has always been guarded religiously as the most precious treasure, and the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council has given it a new and most solemn profession of faith and worship. In fact, the Fathers of the Council, in trying to restore the Sacred Liturgy, with their pastoral care in favor of the universal Church, have been more concerned with nothing than with exhorting the faithful to actively participate with complete faith and great piety in the celebration of this sacrosanct mystery, offering it, together with the priest, as a sacrifice to God for their own salvation and that of the whole world and nourishing themselves with it as spiritual food.

2
2. However, venerable brothers, there is no lack, precisely in the matter of which we speak, of reasons for serious pastoral care and concern, about which the conscience of our apostolic duty does not allow us to remain silent.

3
3. First of all we want to remember a truth, well known to you, but very necessary to eliminate all poison of rationalism; truth, which many Catholics have sealed with their own blood and which famous Fathers and Doctors of the Church have constantly professed and taught, that is, that the Eucharist is a very high mystery, even more so, properly speaking, as the sacred liturgy says, the mystery of faith. Indeed, only in it, as our predecessor Leo XIII, of happy memory, very knowingly says, are all supernatural realities contained with singular richness and variety of miracles.

4
4. And for the edification and joy of all, it pleases us, venerable brothers, to remember the doctrine that the Catholic Church preserves by tradition and teaches with unanimous consent.

5
5. What we have said briefly about the sacrifice of the mass encourages us to also explain something about the sacrament of the Eucharist, since both, sacrifice and sacrament, belong to the same mystery without being able to separate one from the other. The Lord immolates himself in a bloodless manner in the sacrifice of the mass, which represents the sacrifice of the cross, and applies his saving virtue to us, when through the words of consecration he begins to be sacramentally present, as spiritual nourishment of the faithful, under the species of bread and wine.

6
6. But so that no one misunderstands this mode of presence, which surpasses the laws of nature and constitutes in its kind the greatest of miracles, it is necessary to listen with docility to the voice of the church that teaches and prays. This voice, which, in effect, constitutes a perennial echo of the voice of Christ, assures us that Christ does not become present in this sacrament except through the conversion of the entire substance of the bread in his body and of the entire substance of the wine in his blood; admirable and singular conversion, which the Catholic Church rightly and appropriately calls transubstantiation. Once transubstantiation has been carried out, the species of bread and wine undoubtedly acquire a new meaning and a new purpose, since they are no longer ordinary bread and ordinary drink, but the sign of a sacred thing, and the sign of spiritual food; but because of this they acquire a new meaning and a new purpose, since they contain a new reality that we rightly call ontological.

7
7. The Catholic Church renders this latréutic cult to the Eucharistic sacrament, not only during the mass, but also outside its celebration, preserving with the utmost diligence the consecrated hosts, presenting them for the solemn veneration of the Christian faithful, carrying them in procession with the joy of the multitude of the Christian people.

8
8. We beseech you, therefore, venerable brothers, that you preserve pure and complete among the people, entrusted to your care and vigilance, this faith that desires nothing so ardently as to maintain perfect fidelity to the word of Christ and the Apostles, absolutely rejecting all false and pernicious opinions, and that you promote, without shunning words or toil, the Eucharistic cult, to which all other forms of piety must ultimately lead.
