1
1. Mother and Teacher of peoples, the Catholic Church was founded as such by Jesus Christ so that, in the course of the centuries, all those who were to enter her bosom and receive her embrace would find their salvation, with the fullness of a more excellent life. To this Church, pillar and foundation of truth ([+[0]+]), its divine founder entrusted a double mission, that of begetting children for himself, and that of educating and directing them, watching over with maternal care the lives of individuals and peoples, whose superior dignity the Church always looked upon with the utmost respect and defended with the greatest vigilance.

2
2. The doctrine of Christ unites, in effect, earth with heaven, since it considers man complete, soul and body, intelligence and will, and orders him to elevate his mind from the transitory conditions of this earthly life to the heights of eternal life, where one day he will enjoy imperishable happiness and peace.

3
3. Therefore, the Holy Church, although its main mission is to sanctify souls and make them partakers of supernatural goods, is nevertheless concerned with the needs that daily life poses to men, not only those that affect their decent livelihood, but also those related to their interest and prosperity, without excluding any good and throughout the different periods.

4
4. By carrying out this mission, the Church fulfills the mandate of its founder, Christ, who, although he primarily attended to the eternal salvation of man, when he once said: "I am the way, the truth and the life" ([+[0]+]); and in another: "I am the light of the world" ([+[1]+]), upon contemplating the hungry crowd, he exclaimed moved: "I feel compassion for this crowd" ([+[2]+]), showing that he also cared about the material needs of the people. The Redeemer manifested this care not only with words, but with actions, and thus, to calm the hunger of the multitudes, he miraculously multiplied the bread more than once.

5
5. With this bread given as food for the body, he wanted to signify in advance that heavenly food for the souls that he was to deliver to men on the eve of his passion.

6
6. There is nothing strange, then, that the Catholic Church, following the example and fulfilling the mandate of Christ, has constantly held high the torch of charity for two millennia, that is, from the institution of the ancient diaconate to the present day, both with the teaching of its precepts and with its innumerable examples; charity that, harmoniously uniting the teachings and practice of mutual love, admirably carries out the mandate of that double giving that completely encapsulates the doctrine and social action of the Church.

7
7. Now, the most distinguished testimony of this doctrine and social action, developed by the Church over the centuries, has been and is, without a doubt, the luminous encyclical Rerum novarum, promulgated seventy years ago by our predecessor of immortal memory Leo XIII to define the principles that were to resolve the problem of the situation of workers in harmony with the norms of Christian doctrine ([+[0]+]).

8
8. Rarely has the word of a Pontiff obtained such universal resonance as it did then due to the weight and scope of his argumentation and the expressive force of his statements. In reality, the norms and calls of Leo XIII acquired so much importance that in no way can they be forgotten in the future.

9
9. Despite the long period that has passed since the publication of the admirable encyclical Rerum Novarum, its influence remains vigorous even in our days. First,. in the documents of the Supreme Pontiffs who have succeeded Leo

10
10. The teachings that that most wise Pontiff gave to humanity shone with a light that was all the clearer the thicker the darkness of that time of profound economic and political transformations and terrible social upheavals.

11
11. As is known, at that time the conception of the economic world that had achieved the greatest theoretical diffusion and practical validity was a conception that attributed absolutely everything to the necessary forces of nature and, therefore, denied the relationship between moral laws and economic laws.

12
12. In the economic world of that time, the empire of the strongest was considered legitimate and completely dominated in the field of commercial relations. In this way, the economic order was radically disturbed.

13
13. Because while wealth accumulated excessively in the hands of a few, the working masses were subjected to increasingly harsh misery. Salaries were insufficient and even starvation; The proletarians were forced to work in conditions that threatened their health, their moral integrity and their religious faith.

14
14. As a consequence, it naturally happened that the workers, indignant at their own fate, planned to publicly reject this unjust situation; and in the same way the designs of the revolutionaries spread among them more widely, who proposed remedies that were much worse than the evils that had to be remedied.

15
15. At this point, Leo

16
16. It must be recognized that the publication of this encyclical demonstrated no small audacity. Because while some had no qualms about accusing the Catholic Church, as if it, when faced with social issues, was limited to preaching resignation to the poor and generosity to the rich, Leo XIII did not hesitate to openly proclaim and defend the sacred rights of workers.

17
17. You are perfectly familiar, venerable brothers, with the basic principles set forth by that exemplary Pontiff with as much clarity as authority, according to which human coexistence must be completely rebuilt with regard to economic and social realities.

18
18. Firstly, in relation to work, it teaches that it in no way can be considered any commodity, because it comes directly from the human person. For the vast majority of men, work is, in fact, the only source of their decent livelihood.

19
19. To what has been said it must be added that the right to privately possess goods, including those of an instrumental nature, is conferred on each man by nature, and the State is not the owner in any way of abolishing it.

20
20. As for the State, whose purpose is to provide for the common good in the temporal order, it cannot in any way remain outside the economic activities of citizens, but, on the contrary, intervene in time, first, so that they contribute to producing the abundance of material goods, "the use of which is necessary for the exercise of virtue" ([+[0]+]), and, second, to protect the rights of all citizens, especially the weakest, which They are the workers, the women and the children.

21
21. Furthermore, it is an obligation of the State to ensure that employment contracts are regulated in accordance with justice and equity, and that, at the same time, in work environments the dignity of the human person is not diminished, either in body or spirit.

22
22. It is stated, on the other hand, in the same encyclical that workers have the natural right not only to form their own or mixed associations of workers and employers, with the structure that they consider most appropriate to the nature of their profession, but also to move without any obstacles, freely and on their own initiative, within said associations, as their interests demand.

23
23. Finally, workers and employers must regulate their mutual relations, inspired by the principles of human solidarity and Christian fraternity, since both the unlimited free competition that liberalism advocates and the class struggle that Marxism preaches are totally contrary to human nature and the Christian conception of life.

24
24. Here, venerable brothers, are the fundamental principles that must serve as the basis for a healthy economic and social order.

25
25. It should not surprise us, therefore, that the most qualified Catholics, sensitive to the call of the encyclical, have given life to multiple works to turn the content of those principles into practical reality. Eminent men from all the countries of the world have also moved along the same line, driven by the objective demands of nature.

26
26. With all reason, then, the encyclical Rerum Novarum has been and is recognized to this day as the Magna Carta of the establishment of the new economic and social order.

27
27. Pius XI, our predecessor of happy memory, on the fortieth anniversary of the publication of that distinguished code, commemorated this solemnity with the encyclical Quadragesimo anno.

28
28. In this document, the Supreme Pontiff confirms, above all, the right and duty of the Catholic Church to contribute primarily to the adequate solution of the very serious social problems that so distress humanity; He then corroborates the principles and practical criteria of Leo XIII's encyclical, instilling norms adjusted to new times; and finally, he takes advantage of the opportunity to clarify certain doctrinal points about which even some Catholics had doubts and to teach how Catholic doctrine should be applied in the social field, in line with the changes of the time.

29
29. Some doubted then about the criteria that Catholics should really hold regarding private property, compulsory remuneration of labor and, finally, the moderate tendency of socialism.

30
30. Regarding the first point, our predecessor reiterates the natural origin of the right to private property, also analyzing and clarifying the basis of its social function.

31
31. Regarding the salary regime, the august Pontiff first rejects the thesis of those who consider it essentially unjust; It then condemns the inhuman or unjust ways in which it has often been put into practice, and finally sets out the criteria and conditions that must be observed so that said regime does not deviate from justice and equity.

32
32. In this matter, our predecessor clearly teaches that in the present circumstances it is advisable to soften the employment contract with some elements taken from the partnership contract, in such a way that the workers and employees share the domain and administration or participate to a certain extent in the benefits obtained ([+[0]+]) p. 199).

33
33. Also of utmost doctrinal and practical importance is Pius Consequently, when determining remuneration for work, justice requires that the needs of the workers themselves and their respective families be considered, but also the real situation of the company in which they work and the demands of the common economic good ( [+[1]+] ).

34
34. The Supreme Pontiff also states that the opposition between communism and Christianity is radical. And he adds that Catholics cannot in any way approve the doctrine of moderate socialism. Firstly, because the socialist conception of the world limits man's social life within the temporal framework, and considers, pro tanto, purely material well-being as the supreme objective of civil society; and secondly, because, by proposing the production of material goods as the exclusive goal of the social organization of human coexistence, it extraordinarily limits freedom, forgetting the genuine notion of social authority.

35
35. However, Pius XI did not forget that, over the forty years that had elapsed since the publication of Leo Several facts proved this, among them free competition, which, carried away by its intrinsic dynamism, had ended up almost destroyed and accumulated an enormous mass of wealth and the resulting economic power in the hands of a few, "who, most of the time, are not owners, but only depositaries and administrators of goods, which they manage at the discretion of their will" ([+[0]+]).

36
36. Therefore, as the Supreme Pontiff rightly warns, “the economic dictatorship has supplanted the free market; The desire for profit has been succeeded by the unbridled ambition of power; the entire economy has become horribly hard, inexorable, cruel” ( [+[0]+] ). From this it logically followed that even public functions were placed at the service of the economically powerful; and in this way the accumulated wealth tyrannized in a certain way all nations.

37
37. To effectively remedy this decline in public life, the Supreme Pontiff points out as fundamental practical criteria the reintegration of the economic world into the moral order and the full subordination of individual and group interests to the general interests of the common good.

38
38. But the fundamental principles that characterize Pius XI's encyclical can be reduced to two. First principle: absolute prohibition on establishing as supreme law in economic matters individual or group interest, or unlimited free competition, or the abusive predominance of the economically powerful, or the prestige of the nation, or the desire for dominance, or other similar criteria.

39
39. On the contrary, in economic matters it is essential that all activity be governed by justice and charity as supreme laws of the social order.

40
40. The second principle of the encyclical of Pius

41
41. Our predecessor of immortal memory Pius XI has also contributed not a little to this task of defining the rights and obligations of social life. On June 1, 1941, on the feast of Pentecost, he sent a radio message to the entire world “to call the attention of the Catholic world to an event worthy of being sculpted with characters of gold in the splendor of the Church; the fiftieth anniversary of the publication of the transcendental encyclical "Rerum novarum", by Leo XIII » ( [+[0]+] ) p. 196); and to render humble thanks to almighty God for the gift that, fifty years ago, he offered to the Church with that encyclical of his Vicar on earth, and to praise him for the breath of the renewing Spirit that through it, since then in an ever-increasing manner, he poured out on the entire human race ( [+[1]+] ).

42
42. In this radio message, that great Pontiff claims "for the Church the indisputable competence to judge whether the bases of an existing social order are in accordance with the immutable order that God, Creator and Redeemer, has promulgated through natural law and revelation" ([+[0]+]); confirms the perennial vitality and inexhaustible fruitfulness of the teachings of the encyclical of Leo

43
43. Regarding the first question, our predecessor teaches that the right of every man to use material goods for his decent livelihood must be considered superior to any other right of economic content and, consequently, also superior to the right of private property.

44
44. In terms of work, Pius XII, reiterating a principle found in the encyclical of Leo XIII, teaches that it must be considered a duty and a right of each and every man. Consequently, it is up to them, in the first place, to regulate their mutual work relationships: Only in the event that the interested parties do not want or cannot fulfill this function, "it is the duty of the State to intervene in the division and distribution of labor, according to the form and measure required by the common good, correctly understood" ( [+[0]+] ) p. 201).

45
45. As far as the family is concerned, the Supreme Pontiff clearly states that private ownership of material goods contributes greatly to guaranteeing and promoting family life, "since it appropriately ensures to the father the genuine freedom he needs to be able to fulfill the duties that God has imposed on him regarding the physical, spiritual and religious well-being of the family" ([+[0]+]). From here arises precisely the right of the family to emigrate, a point about which our predecessor warns the rulers, both those of countries that allow emigration and those that accept immigration, "to reject anything that diminishes or undermines the mutual and sincere trust between their nations" ([+[1]+]). If this policy is put into practice by both parties, great benefits will necessarily follow for all, with the increase of temporal goods and the progress of human culture.

46
46. The State of affairs, which, at the time of the commemoration of Pius

51
51. As an initial thesis, it must be established that the economy must be the work, above all, of the private initiative of individuals, whether they act alone or associate with each other in multiple ways to pursue their common interests.

52
52. However, for the reasons already given by our predecessors, the active presence of the civil power in this matter is also necessary, in order to guarantee, as it should, a growing production that promotes social progress and benefits all citizens.

53
53. This action of the State, which encourages, stimulates, orders, supplements and completes, is based on the principle of the subsidiary function ( [+[0]+] ) p. 203), formulated by Pius greater and higher community, since every action of society, by virtue of its own nature, must help the members of the social body, but never destroy or absorb them" ( [+[1]+] ).

54
54. It is certainly easy to verify to what extent current scientific progress and advances in production techniques today offer the public power greater concrete possibilities to reduce the gap between the various sectors of production, between different areas of the same country and between different nations on a global level; to stop, within certain limits, the disturbances that usually arise in the uncertain course of the economy and to, finally, effectively remedy the phenomena of mass unemployment.

55
55. But always keep safe the principle that the intervention of public authorities in the economic field, no matter how extensive and profound it may be, should not only not restrict the free initiative of individuals, but, on the contrary, must guarantee the expansion of that free initiative, safeguarding, however, the essential rights of the human person intact.

56
56. Furthermore, the same historical evolution highlights, with increasing clarity, that a fruitful and well-ordered coexistence is impossible without the collaboration, in the economic field, of individuals and public powers, collaboration that must be provided with a common and concordant effort, and in which both parties must adjust that effort to the demands of the common good in harmony with the changes that time and customs impose.

57
57. Daily experience proves, in fact, that when the activity of private initiative is lacking, political tyranny arises. Not only this. Furthermore, there is a general stagnation in certain fields of the economy, consequently missing many consumer goods and multiple services that refer not only to material needs, but also, and mainly, to the demands of the spirit; goods and services whose obtaining exercises and stimulates in an extraordinary way the creative capacity of the individual.

58
58. But when the due intervention of the State is totally lacking or defective in the economy, the people immediately fall into irreparable disorders and abuses of the weak by the morally unconcerned strong immediately arise. This race of men that, unfortunately, takes root in all lands and in all times, like tares among wheat.

59
59. One of the most characteristic features of our time is the increase in social relations, or the progressive multiplication of coexistence relations, with the consequent formation of many forms of life and associated activity, which have been collected, most of the time, by public law or private law.

60
60. This progress in social life is an indication and cause, at the same time, of the growing intervention of public powers, even in matters that, because they belong to the most intimate sphere of the human person, are of undoubted importance and are not without danger.

61
61. There is no doubt that this progress in social relations brings with it numerous advantages and benefits. In effect, it allows many rights of the human person to be better satisfied, especially the so-called economic-social ones, which fundamentally meet the demands of human life: health care, a deeper and more extensive basic education, a more complete professional training, housing, work, convenient rest and honest recreation.

62
62. But, simultaneously with the multiplication and almost daily development of these new forms of association, it happens that, in many sectors of human activity, the legal regulation and definition of the various social relations are becoming more and more detailed.

63
63. The current increase in social life is not, in reality, the product of a blind impulse of nature, but, as we have already said, the work of man, who is free, dynamic and naturally responsible for his action, who is obliged, however, to recognize and respect the laws of the progress of civilization and economic development, and cannot completely avoid the pressure of the environment.

64
64. Therefore, the progress of social relations can and, therefore, must be verified in a way that provides citizens with the greatest number of advantages and avoids, or at least lessens, disadvantages.

65
65. To complete this task more easily, it is required, however, that rulers profess a healthy concept of the common good. This concept encompasses an entire set of social conditions that allow citizens the expeditious and full development of their own perfection.

66
66. In the growing progress that social relations present today, the correct order of the State will be achieved with greater ease the greater the balance that is observed between these two elements: on the one hand, the power with which both citizens and private groups are endowed to govern themselves with autonomy, preserving the mutual collaboration of all in works; and on the other hand, the action of the State that coordinates and promotes private initiative in time.

67
67. If social relations move within the scope of the moral order and in accordance with the criteria indicated, they will not imply, by their very nature, serious dangers or excessive burdens on citizens: on the contrary, they will contribute not only to fostering in them the affirmation and development of the human personality, but also to satisfactorily realizing that desirable bond of coexistence between men, which, as our predecessor Pius XI, of fond memory, warns, in the encyclical Quadragesimo anno, is absolutely necessary to satisfy the rights and obligations of social life.

68
68. A deep bitterness fills our spirit at the immensely painful spectacle of countless workers from many nations and entire continents who are paid such low wages that they and their families are subjected to totally inhumane living conditions. This unfortunate situation must be attributed to the fact that, in those nations and on those continents, the process of industrialization is in its beginnings or is still in an insufficiently developed phase.

69
69. In some of these nations, however, in the face of the extreme poverty of the majority, the abundance and unbridled luxury of a few contrast openly and insolently with the situation of the needy; In others, the current generation is burdened with excessive burdens to increase the productivity of the national economy, according to accelerated rates that completely exceed the limits that justice and equity impose; Finally, in other nations a high percentage of national income is spent on strengthening national prestige more than is fair or enormous budgets are allocated to the arms race.

70
70. It must be added to this that in the most developed economic nations the contrast is not infrequently observed that while high, and even very high, remunerations are set for services of little importance or of debatable value, the assiduous and profitable work of entire categories of honest and diligent citizens is paid with wages that are too low, insufficient for the needs of life, or, in any case, lower than what justice requires, if they are taken into account. Their contribution to the good of the community, to the profits of the company in which they work and to the total income of the country counts.

71
71. In this matter, we consider it our duty to warn once again that, just as it is not legal to completely abandon the determination of wages to the free competition of the market, it is also not legal for its determination to be left to the discretion of the powerful, but in this matter the rules of justice and equity must be maintained at all costs.

72
72. It is evident that the criteria set forth have permanent and universal value; but its degree of application to concrete situations cannot be determined if the available wealth is not duly taken into account; wealth that, in quantity and quality, can vary, and in fact varies, from nation to nation and, within the same nation, from time to time.

73
73. Given that in our time national economies are evolving rapidly, and at an even more accentuated pace after the Second World War, we consider it appropriate to draw everyone's attention to a very serious precept of social justice, namely: that economic development and social progress must go together and accommodate each other, so that all social categories have an adequate participation in the increase in the wealth of the nation.

74
74. «The national economy – as our predecessor, of happy memory, Pius Where this is achieved in a stable way, it will be truly said that the people are economically rich, because the general well-being and, consequently, the personal right of everyone to the use of earthly goods completely conforms to the norms established by God the Creator" ( [+[0]+] ) p. 200).

77
77. This duty of justice can be fulfilled in various ways, as experience shows. One of them, and one of the most desirable today, is to ensure that workers, in the form and degree that seem most appropriate, can gradually participate in the ownership of the company where they work, since today, even more than in the times of our predecessor, "with all possible efforts we must ensure that, in the future, the accumulation of wealth in the hands of the rich is equitably moderated, and that it is also distributed with sufficient profusion among the workers." ( [+[0]+] ).

78
78. But it must also be noted that the proportion between the remuneration of work and the profits of the company must be set in accordance with the demands of the common good, both of the political community itself and of the entire human family.

79
79. As regards the first aspect, they must be considered as requirements of the national common good: providing work for the greatest possible number of workers; prevent the creation, within the nation and even among the workers themselves, of privileged social categories; maintain an adequate proportion between salary and prices; make material goods and the benefits of culture accessible to the greatest number of citizens; eliminate or at least limit inequalities between the different sectors of the economy âagriculture, industry and servicesâ; adequately balance the economic increase with the increase in necessary general services, mainly through the work of the public authority; adjust, as far as possible, production structures to the progress of science and technology; In short, achieve that the improvement in the standard of living not only serves the present generation, but also prepares a better future for future generations.

80
80. They are, on the other hand, requirements of the international common good: avoiding all forms of unfair competition between the various countries in terms of economic expansion; promote harmony and friendly and effective collaboration between the different national economies, and, finally, cooperate effectively in the economic development of the poorest political communities.

81
81. These requirements of the common good, both at the national and global levels, must also be taken into account when it comes to determining the portion of profits that should be allocated, in the form of remuneration, to company leaders, and in the form of interest or dividends, to those who contribute capital.

82
82. The duties of justice must be respected not only in the distribution of the goods that work produces, but also insofar as it affects the general conditions in which work activity is carried out.

83
83. From which it follows that if the functioning and economic structures of a productive system endanger the human dignity of the worker, or weaken his sense of responsibility, or prevent him from free expression of his own initiative, it must be affirmed that this economic order is unjust, even in the case that, by hypothesis, the wealth produced in it reaches a high level and is distributed according to criteria of justice and equity.

84
84. It is not possible to define in a generic manner in economic matters the structures most in line with the dignity of man and most suitable for stimulating the worker's sense of responsibility. This notwithstanding, our predecessor, of happy memory, Pius Cooperative unions must ensure these forms of property the advantages of large companies; and as far as large companies are concerned, the employment contract must be softened with some elements of the partnership contract” ( [+[0]+] ) p. 254).

85
85. Therefore, artisanal businesses, family-sized agricultural businesses, and cooperatives, which can also serve to complete and perfect the above, must be ensured and promoted, in accordance with the demands of the common good and the possibilities of technical progress.

86
86. Later we will talk about the agricultural company. Here we believe it is appropriate to make some indications about the artisan company and the cooperative company.

87
87. First of all, it must be noted that both companies, if they want to achieve a prosperous economic situation, must incessantly adjust, in their structure, operation and production methods, to the new situations that the progress of science and technology and the changing needs and preferences of consumers pose together: an adjustment action that must mainly be carried out by the artisans themselves and the members of the cooperatives.

88
88. Hence the great convenience of providing suitable training to both, both in the purely technical and cultural aspects, and for them to group themselves into a professional organization. It is also essential that the State carry out an adequate economic policy in the chapters relating to education, taxation, credit, security and social insurance.

89
89. Furthermore, this action of the State in favor of the crafts and the cooperative movement also finds its justification in the fact that these labor categories are creators of authentic goods and contribute effectively to the progress of culture.

90
90. Therefore, with paternal love, we invite our dearest children of craftsmanship and cooperativism, spread throughout the world, to clearly feel the very noble social function that has been entrusted to them in society, since with their work they can awaken more and more every day in all social classes the sense of responsibility and the spirit of active collaboration and kindle in everyone the enthusiasm for the originality, elegance and perfection of the work.

91
91. Furthermore, following in this the direction set by our predecessors, we are convinced of the reason that assists workers in the life of the companies where they work. It is not possible to establish with certain and defined standards the characteristics of this participation, since they must be established, rather, taking into account the situation of each company; situation that varies from one to another and that, even within each one, is often subject to radical and very rapid changes.

92
92. This requires that mutual relations between employers and leaders, on the one hand, and workers on the other, bear the seal of mutual respect, esteem, understanding and, furthermore, the loyal and active collaboration and interest of all in the common work; and that work, in addition to being conceived as a source of personal income, is also carried out by all members of the company as fulfillment of a duty and provision of a service for general utility.

93
93. It should be noted, finally, that the exercise of this growing responsibility by workers in companies not only responds to the legitimate demands of human nature, but is in perfect accordance with the economic, social and political development of contemporary times.

94
94. Although the economic and social imbalances that contradict justice and humanity in modern times are great, and profound errors creep throughout the economy, seriously disturbing its activities, purposes, structure and functioning, it is undeniable, however, that modern production systems, driven by scientific and technical progress, have advanced extraordinarily and their growth rate is much faster than in previous times.

95
95. This also makes it possible to increase the number of years allocated to basic education and vocational training for new generations.

96
96. With the implementation of these measures, an environment will be created that will allow workers to take on the greatest responsibilities even within their companies. As far as the State is concerned, it is of utmost interest that citizens, in all sectors of coexistence, feel responsible for the defense of the common good.

97
97. It is an evident reality that, in our time, workers' associations have acquired extensive development, and have generally been recognized as legal institutions in various countries and even internationally. Its purpose is no longer to mobilize the worker for the class struggle, but rather to stimulate collaboration, which is verified mainly through agreements established between associations of workers and employers.

98
98. The reason for this presence is that private companies, although they stand out in the country due to their size, efficiency and importance, are, however, closely linked to the general economic and social situation of each nation, since their own prosperity depends on this situation.

99
99. Now, ordering the provisions that most favor the general situation of the economy is not a matter for private companies, but rather a function of the rulers of the State and those institutions that, operating at a national or supranational level, act in the various sectors of the economy.

100
100. It is natural, therefore, that our thoughts and our paternal affection are directed primarily to the associations that cover various professions and to the trade union movements that, in accordance with the principles of Christian doctrine, are working on almost all the continents of the world.

101
101. But, in addition, we want to give the work of these children of ours the praise it deserves, because it is not limited to the immediate and visible results it obtains, but also has repercussions throughout the immense world of human work, with the general propagation of a right way of acting and thinking and with the life-giving breath of the Christian religion.

102
102. We also want to pay the same paternal praise to those of our beloved children who, imbued with Christian teachings, provide admirable assistance in other professional associations and trade union movements that follow the laws of nature and respect personal freedom in matters of religion and morals.

103
103. We cannot fail to congratulate here and express our cordial appreciation for the International Labor Organization - commonly known by the acronym O.L.L., I.L.O or I.L.O. - which, for many years now, has been making an effective and valuable contribution to establishing throughout the world an economic and social order inspired by the principles of justice and humanity, within which the legitimate rights of workers are recognized and guaranteed. workers.

104
104. In recent years, as is known, in the most important economic companies, the separation between the function that corresponds to the owners of productive assets and the responsibility that falls to the directors of the company has been increasingly accentuated.

105
105. It is also known that, nowadays, more and more people put in modern social insurance and in the multiple social security systems the reason to calmly look to the future, which in other times was based on the ownership of a patrimony, even if it was modest.

106
106. Finally, it is also a fact of our times that man prefers the mastery of a specific profession to the ownership of goods and puts income whose source is work, or rights derived from it, before income that comes from capital or rights derived from it.

107
107. This new attitude fully coincides with the natural character of work, which, due to its immediate origin from the human person, must take precedence over the possession of external goods, which by their very nature are of an instrumental nature; and it must be considered, therefore, as proof of the progress of humanity.

108
108. Such new aspects of the modern economy have contributed to spreading doubt about whether, today, a principle of economic and social order taught and firmly advocated by our predecessors has ceased to be valid, or at least has lost importance; that is, the principle that establishes that men have a natural right to private ownership of goods, including production goods.

109
109. This doubt is completely unfounded. Because the right of private property, even with regard to productive goods, has a permanent value, since it is a right contained in nature itself, which teaches us the priority of individual man over civil society, and, consequently, the necessary theological subordination of civil society to man.

110
110. This is what explains the fact that certain political and social movements that want to reconcile freedom with justice, and that were, until now, contrary to the right of private property of productive goods, today, more broadly taught by social evolution, have somewhat rectified their own opinions and maintain a positive attitude towards that right.

111
111. We are pleased, therefore, to repeat the observations made on this matter by our predecessor, of happy memory, Pius XII: «When the Church defends the principle of private property, it pursues a high ethical-social goal. He does not intend to maintain purely and simply the current state of things, as if he saw in it the expression of divine will; nor protect on principle the rich and the plutocrat against the poor and indigent. Quite the opposite: The Church seeks above all to ensure that the institution of private property is what it should be, in accordance with the designs of divine Wisdom and with the provisions of nature" ( [+[0]+] ) p. 253). That is, private property must ensure the rights that freedom grants to the human person and, at the same time, provide its necessary collaboration to restore the right order of society.

112
112. As we have already said, in many nations the most recent economic systems progress rapidly and achieve increasingly efficient production of goods. In such a situation, justice and equity demand that, while keeping the common good safe, the remuneration for work must also be increased, which will allow workers to save more easily and thus build wealth.

113
113. It is not enough, however, to affirm that man has a natural right to private property of goods, including those of production, if, at the same time, efforts are not made with all energy to extend the exercise of this right to all social classes.

114
114. As our predecessor of happy memory, Pius 17), and, on the other hand, the intrinsic nobility of work requires, among other things, the conservation and perfection of a social order that makes secure property, even if modest, possible for all classes of the people ([+[1]+]).

115
115. Today, more than ever, we must defend the need to spread private property, because, in our times, as we have already recalled, the economic systems of a growing number of countries are experiencing rapid development.

116
116. What we have explained up to this point does not exclude, as is obvious, that the State and other public institutions also legitimately possess productive assets, especially since these "carry with them such economic power that it is not possible to leave it in the hands of private persons without danger to the common good" ([+[0]+]).

117
117. Our era records a progressive expansion of the property of the State and other public institutions. The cause of this expansion must be found in the fact that the common good today requires the public authority to fulfill a growing series of functions.

118
118. Finally, it must be stated that the economic enterprises of the State or public institutions must be entrusted to those citizens who stand out for their technical competence and proven honesty and who faithfully fulfill their duties to the country.

119
119. But neutral predecessors have also consistently taught the principle that a social function is intrinsically inherent to the right of private property. In reality, within the plan of God the Creator, all the goods of the earth are destined, first of all, for the decent sustenance of all men, as our predecessor of happy memory Leo others. "Therefore, he who has breath, be careful not to remain silent; he who abounds in goods, be careful not to be too harsh in the exercise of mercy; he who has a job from which to live, let him strive to share its use and usefulness with his neighbor."

120
120. Although, in our time, both the State and public institutions have expanded and continue to expand the field of their intervention, it should not be concluded in any way that the social function of private property has disappeared, as some mistakenly believe, since this function draws its strength from the right of property itself.

121
121. On this occasion it is timely to remember, finally, how the authority of the sacred Gospel undoubtedly sanctions the right of private ownership of goods, but, at the same time, it frequently presents Jesus Christ commanding the rich to change the material goods they possess into spiritual goods and give them to the needy: «Do not store up treasures on earth, where moth and rust corrode them and where thieves break in and steal. Store up treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in or steal" ([+[0]+]). And the Divine Master declares that he considers the charity given or denied to those in need to be done or denied to himself: "As many times as you did that to one of these younger brothers of mine, you did it to me" ([+[1]+]).

122
122. The historical development of the current era demonstrates, with increasing evidence, that the precepts of justice and equity must not only regulate the relations between workers and employers, but also those that mediate between the different sectors of the economy, between areas of different levels of wealth within each nation and, within the world, between countries that are at different levels of economic and social development.

123
123. We will begin by exposing some points about agriculture. We note, first of all, that the rural population, in absolute numbers, does not seem to have decreased. However, there are undoubtedly many farmers who leave the countryside to go to larger towns and even urban centers. This rural exodus, because it occurs in almost all countries and sometimes acquires multitudinous proportions, creates problems that are difficult to solve in terms of the decent standard of living of citizens.

124
124. Everyone can see the fact that, as the economy progresses, the workforce dedicated to agriculture decreases, while the percentage dedicated to industry and the service sector increases. We judge, however, that the exodus of the agricultural population towards other sectors of production is frequently due to reasons derived from economic development itself. But in the vast majority of cases it responds to a series of stimuli, among which the main ones must be the desire to escape from a narrow environment with no prospects for a more comfortable life; the itch for novelties and adventures with which our age is so possessed; the desire for quick enrichment; the illusion of living with greater freedom, enjoying the means and facilities offered by the most populous towns and urban centers. But there is also no doubt that the exodus from the countryside is due to the fact that the agricultural sector is, almost everywhere, a depressed sector, both in terms of the labor productivity index and in terms of the standard of living of rural populations.

125
125. Therefore, faced with a problem of such importance that affects almost all countries, it is necessary to investigate, first, the most suitable procedures to reduce the enormous differences in productivity that are registered between the agricultural sector and the industrial and service sectors; Secondly, we must seek the most appropriate means so that the standard of living of the agricultural population is as little distance as possible from the standard of living of the citizens who earn their income working in the other sectors mentioned; Finally, the necessary efforts must be made so that farmers do not suffer from an inferiority complex compared to other social groups, but rather, on the contrary, they live convinced that even within the rural environment they can not only consolidate and perfect their own personality through field work, but also calmly look ahead.

126
126. It seems to us, therefore, very appropriate to indicate in this matter some norms of permanent value, provided that they are applied, obviously, in accordance with what the specific circumstances of time and place allow, advise or absolutely require.

131
131. Now, to achieve proportionate development between the different sectors of the economy, a careful economic policy in agricultural matters by public authorities is also absolutely essential, an economic policy that must address the following chapters: Taxation, credit, social insurance, prices, promotion of complementary industries and, finally, the improvement of the structure of the agricultural company.

132
132. Regarding taxes, the fundamental requirement of any fair and equitable tax system is that the charges are adapted to the economic capacity of citizens.

133
133. Now, in the regulation of farmers' taxes, the common good requires that the authorities bear in mind the fact that economic income from the agricultural sector is realized more slowly and with greater risks, and, therefore, it is more difficult to obtain the capital necessary to increase this income.

134
134. A consequence follows from what has been said: that the owners of capital prefer to place it in other businesses rather than in agriculture. For this reason, farmers cannot pay high interest rates. Furthermore, they cannot even pay, on a regular basis, the normal market interest rates to obtain the capital needed for the normal development and functioning of their companies. It is necessary, therefore, for reasons of the common good, to establish a particular credit policy for agriculture and also create credit institutions that assure farmers of capital at an affordable interest rate.

135
135. It is also necessary that two insurance systems be implemented in agriculture: the first, relating to agricultural products, and the second, referring to the farmers themselves and their respective families. Because, as is known, the per capita income of the agricultural sector is generally lower than the per capita income of the industrial and service sectors, and, for this reason, it does not seem fully in line with the norms of social justice and equity to implement social insurance or social security systems in which the treatment given to farmers is substantially inferior to that guaranteed to workers in industry and services. The insurance guarantees that social policy establishes in general should not present notable differences among themselves, regardless of the economic sector where the citizen works or on whose income he or she lives.

136
136. On the other hand, since social insurance and social security systems can effectively contribute to a fair and equitable redistribution of the total income of the political community, they must, for this reason, be considered an appropriate way to reduce the differences between the different categories of citizens.

137
137. Given the peculiar nature of agricultural products, it is essential to guarantee the security of their prices, using the multiple resources that economists have at their disposal today. At this point, although it is extremely effective for the interested parties themselves to exercise this protection, imposing the appropriate rules on themselves, the moderating action of the public powers should not be lacking.

138
138. It must also not be forgotten that the price of agricultural products generally constitutes a remuneration for work, rather than a remuneration for the capital employed.

139
139. This is why our predecessor of happy memory, Pius but he adds immediately: "This is in turn closely related to the fair proportion of the sales prices of the products obtained by the different sectors of the economy, which are agriculture, industry and other similar sectors."

140
140. And since farm products are mainly ordered to satisfy the most fundamental human needs, it is necessary that their prices be determined in such a way as to make them affordable to all consumers. From which, however, it evidently follows that it would undoubtedly be unfair to force an entire category of citizens, that of farmers, into a permanent state of economic and social inferiority, depriving them of purchasing power essential to maintaining a decent standard of living, which is evidently in open contradiction with the common good.

141
141. It is also appropriate to promote, in rural areas, industries and services related to the conservation, transformation and transportation of agricultural products. To which we must necessarily add in these areas the creation of activities related to other sectors of the economy and professions. With the implementation of these measures, the agricultural family is given the possibility of supplementing their income in the same environments in which they live and work.

142
142. Finally, no one can establish in generic terms the fundamental lines to which the agricultural enterprise must adhere, given the extreme variety that in this sector of the economy the different agricultural areas of the same nation and, above all, the various countries of the world present. However, those who have a natural and, above all, Christian conception of the dignity of man and the family, consider the agricultural business, and mainly the family business, as a community of people in which the internal relationships of the different members and its functional structure must adjust to the criteria of justice and the Christian spirit, and they seek, by all means, that this conception of the agricultural business soon becomes a reality, according to the specific circumstances of place and time.

143
143. The firmness and stability of the family business depends, however, on whether sufficient income can be obtained from it to maintain a decent standard of living in the respective family. For this reason, it is absolutely necessary that farmers be perfectly instructed in what concerns their work, be able to learn about new inventions and be technically assisted in the exercise of their profession. It is also essential that rural men establish an extensive network of cooperative companies, form professional associations and intervene effectively in public life, both in administrative bodies and in political activities.

144
144. We are convinced, however, that the main authors of the economic development, cultural elevation and social progress of the countryside must be the same stakeholders, that is, the farmers themselves. These must have a clear and deep awareness of the nobility of their profession. They work, in fact, in the majestic temple of Creation, and they carry out their work, generally, among trees and animals, whose life, inexhaustible in its expressive capacity and inflexible in its laws, is rich in memories of the creator and provident God. Furthermore, agriculture not only produces the rich range of foods with which the human family is nourished, but also provides an increasing number of raw materials to industry.

145
145. Furthermore, field work is endowed with a specific dignity, since it uses and puts at its service a series of products developed by mechanics, chemistry and biology, products that must be updated, without interruption, in accordance with the needs of the time, given the impact that scientific and technical progress has on agriculture.

146
146. It should also be noted that in the agricultural sector, as in other production sectors, it is very convenient for farmers to associate, especially if they are family-based agricultural businesses. Farmers must feel solidarity with each other and collaborate together in the creation of cooperative companies and professional associations, which are absolutely necessary, because they provide the farmer with the advantages of scientific and technical progress and contribute decisively to the defense of the prices of farm products.

147
147. However, agricultural workers, in the same way as those in the other sectors of production, in making the full weight of their economic importance felt, must necessarily proceed without any breach of the moral order and established law, seeking to harmonize their rights and interests with the rights and interests of the other professional economic categories, and subordinate both to the demands of the common good.

148
148. For this reason, we are pleased to express our satisfaction to those of our children who, in various parts of the world, strive to create and consolidate cooperative enterprises and professional associations so that all those who cultivate the land, like other citizens, enjoy a proper economic standard of living and fair social dignity.

149
149. In field work, man finds everything that contributes to the decent perfection of his own dignity. Therefore, the farmer must conceive his work as a command from God and an exalted mission. It is also necessary to consecrate this task to the provident God, who directs history towards the eternal salvation of man. Finally, he must take upon himself the task of contributing with his personal efforts to the elevation of himself and others, as a contribution to human civilization.

150
150. Very frequently, within the same nation, economic and social differences are observed between different classes of citizens, due mainly to the fact that both live and work in areas of unequal economic development. In situations like this, justice and equity demand that rulers try to completely eliminate, or at least reduce, such differences. To this end, efforts should be made to ensure that in less economically developed areas, fundamental public services are guaranteed that are most appropriate to the circumstances of the time and place and in accordance, as far as possible, with the common way of life. To achieve this, it is absolutely essential that the appropriate policy be undertaken, which diligently attends to the organization of the following points: labor recruitment, internal emigration, salaries, taxes, credits and industrial investments aimed mainly at promoting the development of other activities. All these measures are fully suitable, not only to promote the profitable employment of labor and stimulate entrepreneurship, but also to exploit the local resources of each area.

151
151. However, it is necessary that rulers limit themselves to adopting only those measures that seem adjusted to the common good of citizens. The authorities must assiduously ensure, with a view to the usefulness of the entire country, that the economic development of the three sectors of production – agriculture, industry and services – is, as far as possible, simultaneous and proportionate; with the constant purpose that citizens of less developed areas feel like protagonists of their own economic, social and cultural elevation. Because the citizen always has the right to be the main author of his own progress.

152
152. Consequently, it is essential that private initiative also contribute, to the extent it has its part, to establishing equitable regulation of the country's economy. Furthermore, the authorities, by virtue of the principle of subsidiary function, have to favor and assist private initiative in such a way that it is, to the extent that reality allows, that continues and concludes the economic development initiated by it.

153
153. This is an opportune occasion to note that there are many nations in which there is a manifest disproportion between arable land and the agricultural population. Indeed, in some nations there is a shortage of arable hands and an abundance of land, while in others labor is abundant and arable land is scarce.

154
154. Furthermore, there are nations in which, despite the potential wealth of their soil, the rudimentary and antiquated state of their cultivation systems does not allow them to produce the quantity of goods sufficient to satisfy the most basic needs of the respective populations; In other countries, on the contrary, the high degree of modernization achieved by agriculture determines an overproduction of agricultural goods that causes negative effects on the respective national economies.

155
155. It is evident, therefore, that both universal human solidarity and the feeling of Christian brotherhood absolutely demand that peoples provide each other with active and varied mutual aid, from which will follow not only an easier exchange of goods, capital and men, but also a reduction of the inequalities that exist between the various nations. But we will talk more carefully about this problem later.

156
156. We wish, however, to express here our great esteem for the work that the F.A.O. has been doing to feed the people and stimulate the development of agriculture. The specific purposes of this organization are to foster mutual relations between peoples, promote the modernization of the countryside in underdeveloped nations and help countries that suffer the scourge of hunger.

157
157. But perhaps the greatest problem of our days is that which concerns the relations that must exist between economically developed nations and countries that are still in the process of economic development: the former enjoy a comfortable life; The latter, on the other hand, suffer from extremely severe shortages. The social solidarity that today unites all men in a single family imposes on nations that enjoy abundant economic wealth the obligation not to remain indifferent to countries whose members, oppressed by innumerable internal difficulties, are exhausted by misery and hunger and do not enjoy, as they should, the fundamental rights of man. This obligation is increased by the fact that, given the progressive interdependence that peoples currently feel, it is no longer possible for a lasting and fruitful peace to reign among them if the economic and social differences between them become excessive.

158
158. We, therefore, who love all men as children, consider it our duty to solemnly repeat the affirmation expressed on other occasions: «We are all jointly responsible for the undernourished populations ( [+[0]+] ) p. 465)... «( [+[1]+] ) it is necessary to raise awareness of this serious obligation in each and every one and especially in the economically powerful» ( [+[2]+] ).

159
159. As is evident, the grave duty, which the Church has always proclaimed, to help those who suffer from destitution and misery, must be felt in a very principal way by Catholics, as members of the mystical Body of Christ. "In this," John the apostle proclaims, "we have known the charity of God, in that He gave His life for us, and so we must be ready to give our lives for our brothers. "He who has the goods of this world and seeing his brother in need closes his bowels, how is it possible for the charity of God to dwell in him?" ( [+[0]+] ).

160
160. We therefore see with pleasure how nations with more advanced economic systems provide aid to underdeveloped countries to facilitate their improvement in their current situation.

161
161. As is known, there are nations that have an overabundance of consumer goods, and particularly agricultural products. There are others, however, in which large masses of the population fight against misery and hunger. Therefore, both justice and humanity demand that rich nations lend their aid to poor nations. Therefore, completely destroying or wasting goods that are indispensable for the lives of men is as contrary to the duties of justice as those imposed by humanity.

163
163. However, this aid cannot immediately eliminate the permanent causes of misery or hunger in many countries. Generally, the cause lies in the backwardness of the economic systems of these countries. To remedy this backwardness, all possible means must be mobilized, so that, on the one hand, the citizens of these nations are perfectly educated in the exercise of techniques and in the fulfillment of their jobs, and, on the other, they can possess the capital that will allow them to carry out economic development on their own, with the criteria and methods of our time.

164
164. We know perfectly well how in recent years the awareness of the obligation they have to help poor countries, which are still in a situation of underdevelopment, has deepened in many men in order to ensure that they facilitate advances in economic development and social progress.

165
165. In order to achieve such desired goals, we see how supranational and state organizations, private foundations and private companies offer, with increasing liberality, technical aid to these countries on a daily basis to increase their production. For this reason, facilities are given to many young people so that, by studying at the great universities of the most developed nations, they acquire scientific and technical training at the level demanded by our time. It must be added that certain global banking institutions, some separate States and private initiative itself frequently provide capital loans to underdeveloped countries, to set up in them a wide series of institutions whose purpose is economic production. We are pleased to take this opportunity to express our sincere appreciation for such an excellent work. It is to be hoped, however, that from now on the richest nations will continue to increase their efforts to help countries that are beginning their development, in order to promote the scientific, technical and economic progress of the latter.

166
166. At this point we consider some warnings are appropriate.

167
167. The first is that nations that have not yet begun or have just begun their economic development will act prudently if they examine the general trajectory that already economically developed nations have followed.

168
168. Producing a greater number of goods, and producing it by the most suitable procedure, are demands of reasonable planning and of the many needs that exist. However, both existing needs and justice demand that the wealth produced be distributed equitably among all the citizens of the country. Therefore, efforts must be made to ensure that economic development and social progress advance simultaneously. This process, in turn, must be carried out in a similar way in the different sectors of agriculture, industry and services of all kinds.

169
169. It is also a well-known fact that nations whose economic development is underway present certain characteristic notes, born from the natural environment in which they live, from national traditions of authentic human value and from the peculiar character of their own members.

170
170. Economically developed nations, when providing aid, must recognize and respect the traditional heritage of each people, carefully avoiding using their cooperation to impose on said countries an imitation of their own way of life.

171
171. It is also necessary for economically advanced nations to especially carefully avoid the temptation to provide aid to poor countries with the aim of directing the political situation of said countries to their own advantage and thus realizing their plans for world hegemony.

172
172. If on any occasion this purpose is intended to be carried out, it must be openly denounced that what is intended, in reality, is to establish a new form of colonialism, which, although covered with an honest name, constitutes another vision of the old and anachronistic colonial rule, of which many nations have recently divested themselves; which, because it is contrary to the relations that normally unite peoples among themselves, would create a serious threat to the tranquility of all countries.

173
173. Reasons of necessity and justice demand, therefore, that States that provide technical and financial aid to underdeveloped nations do so without any intention of political domination and with the sole purpose of enabling them to achieve their own economic and social advancement.

174
174. If this is done, it will contribute not a little to forming a kind of community of all peoples, within which each State, conscious of its duties and rights, will collaborate, on an equal basis, for the prosperity of all other countries.

175
175. There is no doubt that, if in a nation the progress of science, technology, the economy and the prosperity of citizens advance at the same time, a gigantic step is taken in terms of culture and human civilization. But everyone must be convinced that these goods are not the supreme goods, but only instrumental means to achieve the latter.

176
176. For this reason, we observe with painful bitterness how in economically developed nations there are few men who live completely unconcerned with the just ordering of goods, unscrupulously disregarding, completely forgetting or stubbornly denying the goods of the spirit, while they ardently desire scientific, technical and economic progress, and so overestimate material well-being that they generally consider it the supreme good of their lives. This disordered appreciation has the consequence that the aid provided to underdeveloped peoples is not free from pernicious dangers, since in the citizens of these countries, as a result of an ancient tradition, the awareness of the fundamental goods on which human morality is based still has general validity and practical influence on behavior.

178
178. The Church belongs by divine right to all nations. Its universality is actually proven by the fact of its current presence throughout the world and by its willingness to welcome all peoples.

179
179. Now, the Church, by winning people to Christ, necessarily contributes to their temporal well-being, both in the economic order and in the field of social relations. The history of past times and our own era fully demonstrates this effectiveness. All those who publicly profess Christianity accept and promise to contribute personally to the improvement of civil institutions and to strive by all means possible so that not only does human dignity not suffer any deformation, but also that obstacles of all kinds are overcome and those means that lead to and stimulate moral goodness and virtue are promoted.

180
180. Furthermore, the Church, once it has injected its own vitality into the veins of a people, is not and does not feel like an institution imposed from outside on said people. This is due to the fact that his presence is manifested in the rebirth or resurrection of each man in Christ; Now, whoever is reborn or resurrected in Christ never feels coerced by any external pressure; On the contrary, upon feeling that he has achieved perfect freedom, he heads towards God with the impetus of his freedom, and in this way everything that is authentic moral good in him is consolidated and ennobled.

181
181. «The Church of Jesus Christ – our predecessor Pius characteristics that people rightly defend religiously and jealously as a sacred heritage. The Church seeks deep unity, shaped by a supernatural love, in which all people exercise themselves intensely; It does not seek an absolute uniformity, exclusively external, that weakens the natural forces themselves. All the norms and provisions that serve for the prudent development and for the balanced increase of one's own energies and faculties - which are born from the most hidden depths of every race - the Church approves and favors with a mother's love, as long as they do not oppose the obligations imposed by the common origin and the common destiny of all men ([+[0]+] ) p. 428-429).

182
182. We see, therefore, with great satisfaction of our spirit how the Catholic citizens of underdeveloped nations do not, in any way, give up to anyone the first place in the effort that their countries make to progress, according to their possibilities, in the economic and social order.

183
183. On the other hand, we observe how Catholics in the richest States multiply their initiatives and efforts to ensure that the aid provided by their countries to economically weak nations facilitates their economic and social progress as much as possible. Worthy of applause are, in this regard, the multiple and growing assistance that they have been providing to Afro-Asian students scattered throughout the great Universities of Europe and America for their better literary and technical training, and the attention that they dedicate to the training of individuals of all professions so that they are willing to move to underdeveloped nations and carry out their technical and professional activities there.

184
184. To these dear children of ours, who throughout the earth clearly demonstrate the perennial effectiveness and vitality of the Church with their extraordinary efforts in promoting the genuine progress of nations and inspiring the healthy force of authentic civilization, we want to express our applause and our gratitude.

185
185. In recent times, the problem of how to coordinate economic systems and livelihoods with the intense increase in human population, both globally and in relation to countries in need, has often arisen.

186
186. At the global level, some observe that, according to statistical calculations, humanity, within a few decades, will reach a very high total population, while the economy will advance much more slowly. From this they deduce that, if human procreation is not stopped, the disproportion between the population and the essential means of subsistence will increase significantly in the near future.

187
187. As is known, statistics from economically less developed countries show that, due to the general dissemination of modern advances in hygiene and medicine, the average age of man has been prolonged and infant mortality has been significantly reduced. And the birth rate in countries where it is already growing remains stationary, at least for a not short period of time. On the other hand, while birth rates exceed mortality rates each year, production systems increase demographic growth. Therefore, in the poorest countries the worst thing is not that the standard of living does not improve, but that it even continually worsens. Thus, there are those who believe that, so that this situation does not reach dangerous extremes, it is necessary to prevent conception or repress, in whatever way, human births.

188
188. In fact, at the global level the relationship between population growth, on the one hand, and the means of subsistence, on the other, does not seem, at least for now and even in the near future, to create serious difficulties. The arguments made in this matter are so dubious and controversial that they do not allow certain conclusions to be deduced.

189
189. Add to this that God, in his goodness and wisdom, has given nature an almost inexhaustible capacity for production and has enriched man with an intelligence so penetrating that it allows him to use the ideal instruments to put all natural resources at the service of the needs and benefits of his life. Consequently, the clear solution to this problem must not be sought outside the moral order established by God, violating the procreation of human life itself, but, on the contrary, man must seek, with all kinds of technical and scientific procedures, deep knowledge and increasing mastery of the energies of nature. The progress made so far by science and technology opens up almost unlimited hope for the future in this field.

190
190. It is not hidden from us that in some regions, and also in countries with limited resources, in addition to these problems, other difficulties often arise, due to the fact that their economic and social organization is set up in such a way that they cannot have the necessary means of subsistence to face the annual demographic growth, since the peoples do not show the indispensable harmony in their mutual relations.

191
191. Even granting that these facts are real, we nevertheless declare, with absolute clarity, that these problems must be raised and resolved in such a way that man does not resort to methods and procedures contrary to his own dignity, such as those shamelessly taught by those who profess a totally materialist conception of man and life.

192
192. We judge that the only solution to the problem consists of economic and social development that preserves and increases the true goods of the individual and of the entire society. When dealing with this question, we must put first everything that refers to the dignity of man in general and the life of the individual, which nothing can surpass. Furthermore, at this point we must seek the mutual collaboration of all peoples, so that, with evident collective benefit, an exchange of knowledge, capital and people can be organized among all nations.

193
193. In this matter we make a serious declaration: human life is communicated and propagated through the family, which is founded on the one and indissoluble marriage, which for Christians has been elevated to the dignity of a sacrament. And since human life is propagated to other men in a conscious and responsible manner, it follows that this propagation must be carried out in accordance with the sacrosanct, immutable and inviolable laws of God, which must be known and respected by all. No one, therefore, can lawfully use in this matter the measures or procedures that are lawful to use in the genetics of plants or animals.

194
194. The life of man, in fact, must be considered by all as something sacred, since from its very origin it demands the creative action of God. Therefore, whoever deviates from what was established by Him, not only offends the divine majesty and degrades himself and all of humanity, but also weakens the intimate energies of his own country.

195
195. For these reasons, it is of utmost importance that not only are the new generations educated with an increasingly perfect cultural and religious formation - which constitutes a right and a duty of parents - but it is also necessary that they are instilled with a deep sense of responsibility in all manifestations of life and, therefore, also in order to establish the family and the procreation and education of children.

196
196. Now, as recalled in Genesis, the Creator gave the first human couple two commandments, which complement each other: the first, propagate life, "grow and multiply" ([+[0]+]); the second, to dominate nature: "Fill the earth and rule over it" ([+[1]+]).

197
197. The second of these precepts was not given to destroy natural goods, but to satisfy with them the needs of human life.

198
198. With great sadness, therefore, in our spirit we currently observe a contradiction between two facts: on the one hand, economic hardships are presented to the eyes of everyone in such a closed manner, that it seems as if human life were about to perish under misery and hunger; On the other hand, the latest discoveries in science, advances in technology and growing economic resources become instruments with which humanity is exposed to extreme ruin and horrible slaughter.

199
199. God, in his providence, has granted the human race sufficient resources to face in a dignified manner the burdens inherent in the procreation of children. But this can be a difficult or totally impossible solution if men, deviating from the right path and with perverse intentions, use such resources against human reason or against the social nature of the latter and, consequently, against the plans of God himself.

200
200. Relations between different countries, by virtue of scientific and technical advances, in all aspects of human coexistence, have become much closer in recent years. For this reason, the interdependence of peoples necessarily becomes greater and greater.

201
201. Thus, the most important problems of the day in the scientific and technical, economic and social, political and cultural fields, because they often exceed the possibilities of a single country, necessarily affect many and sometimes all nations.

202
202. This is why isolated States, even though they stand out for their culture and civilization, the number and intelligence of their citizens, the progress of their economic systems, the abundance of resources and territorial extension, cannot, however, separated from others, adequately resolve their fundamental problems by themselves. Consequently, nations, finding themselves in need of some complementary aid and others of further improvement, will only be able to attend to their own usefulness while simultaneously looking to the benefit of others. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary that States understand each other well and provide mutual aid.

203
203. Although in the minds of all men and all peoples the conviction of this double need is gaining more ground every day, nevertheless, men, and mainly those who stand out in public life due to their greater authority, generally seem incapable of achieving that intelligence and mutual aid so desired by the people. The reason for this inability does not come from the fact that the people lack scientific, technical or economic instruments, but rather from the fact that they distrust each other. In reality, men, and also States, fear each other. Each one fears, in effect, that the other harbors intentions of domination and is waiting for the opportune moment to achieve them. That is why countries make all the necessary preparations to defend their cities and territory, that is, they rearm in order to deter, as they declare, any other State from any effective aggression.

204
204. From this clearly comes the fact that people use human energies and natural resources on a large scale to the detriment rather than to the benefit of humanity and that, furthermore, a deep feeling of anguish is created in individuals and nations that delays the due pace of the most important undertakings.

205
205. The cause of this situation seems to come from the fact that men, and mainly the supreme authorities of the States, have totally different conceptions of life in their actions. There are, in fact, those who dare to deny the existence of an objective moral law, absolutely necessary and universal and, ultimately, equal for everyone. For this reason, since men do not recognize a single law of justice with universal value, they cannot reach a full and secure agreement on anything.

206
206. Because, although the term justice and the expression demands of justice are on everyone's lips, nevertheless, these words have the same meaning for all of us; Furthermore, very often, they have the opposite. Therefore, when these statesmen make an appeal to justice or the demands of justice, they not only disagree about the meaning of such words, but they also often serve as a reason for serious altercations; From all of this it follows that the conviction takes root in them that, to achieve their own rights and interests, there is no other way but to resort to violence, always the seed of very serious evils.

207
207. In order for reciprocal trust between the supreme rulers of nations to subsist and be further strengthened in them, it is essential that above all they recognize and maintain the laws of truth and justice.

208
208. Now, the sole basis of moral precepts is God. If the idea of ​​God is denied, those precepts necessarily disintegrate completely. Man, in fact, consists not only of body, but also of soul, endowed with intelligence and freedom. The soul demands, therefore, in an absolute way, by virtue of its own nature, a moral law based on religion, which has a capacity far superior to that of any other force or material utility to solve the problems of individual and social life, both within nations and within international society.

209
209. However, today there is no shortage of those who affirm that, thanks to the extraordinary flourishing of science and technology, men can, regardless of God and only with their own strength, reach the supreme summit of human civilization.

210
210. The truth of this statement is proven by scientific progress itself, which is opening almost unlimited horizons and raising in the intelligence of many the conviction that the mathematical sciences cannot penetrate into the depths of matter and its transformations nor explain them with adequate words, but at most analyze them by means of hypotheses.

211
211. Meanwhile, in the richest nations, men, increasingly dissatisfied with the possession of material goods, abandon the utopia of a lasting paradise here on earth. At the same time, all humanity is not only acquiring an increasingly clear awareness of the inviolable and universal rights of the human person, but is also striving with all kinds of resources to establish mutual relations among men that are more just and appropriate to their own dignity. From this derives the fact that men today are beginning to recognize their natural limitations and seek the realities of the spirit with a greater desire than before.

212
212. As in the past, in ours too the progress of science and technology powerfully influences the social relations of the citizen. For this reason, it is necessary that, both at the national and international levels, these relations be regulated with a more humane balance.

213
213. To this end, many ideologies have been developed and disseminated in writing. Some of them have already disappeared, like fog before the sun. Others have undergone a complete change today. The rest are currently losing, little by little, their influence on men.

214
214. Because the most false theory of our days is the one that affirms that the religious sense, which nature has instilled in men, must be considered as pure fiction or mere imagination, which must, therefore, be totally torn from the spirits because it is absolutely contrary to the character of our time and the progress of civilization.

215
215. Therefore, no matter how great the technical and economic progress becomes, neither justice nor peace can exist on earth as long as men are not aware of the dignity they possess as beings created by God and elevated to divine filiation; by God, we say, who is the first and last cause of all created reality. Man, separated from God, becomes inhuman for himself and for his fellow men, because human relationships absolutely demand the direct relationship of man's conscience with God, source of all truth, justice and love.

216
216. The cruel persecution that so many of our brothers and children, dear to Us, have been suffering for many years in numerous countries, some of them with ancient Christian civilization, is well known. This persecution, which demonstrates in the eyes of all men the moral superiority of the persecuted and the refined cruelty of the persecutors, even though it has not yet awakened repentance in them, has nevertheless caused them great concern.

217
217. However, the most characteristic folly of our time consists in the attempt to establish a solid and profitable temporal order without supporting it on its indispensable foundation or, what is the same, ignoring God, and wanting to exalt the greatness of man by blocking the source from which it springs and is nourished, that is, hindering and, if possible, annihilating the innate tendency of the soul towards God.

218
218. The Catholic Church teaches and proclaims a doctrine of society and human coexistence that undoubtedly has perennial effectiveness.

219
219. The capital principle, without a doubt, of this doctrine affirms that man is necessarily the foundation, cause and end of all social institutions; man, we repeat, insofar as he is sociable by nature and has been elevated to a supernatural order.

220
220. From this transcendental principle, which affirms and defends the sacred dignity of the person, the Holy Church, with the collaboration of competent priests and laymen, has deduced, mainly in the last century, a luminous social doctrine to order mutual human relations in accordance with general criteria, which respond both to the demands of nature and the different conditions of human coexistence as well as the specific character of the current era, criteria that precisely for this reason can be accepted by all.

221
221. However, today more than ever, it is necessary that this social doctrine be not only known and studied, but also put into practice in the form and to the extent that the circumstances of time and place allow or demand. Certainly arduous, but excellent mission, to whose fulfillment we exhort not only our brothers and children from all over the world, but also all sensible men.

222
222. First of all, we confirm the thesis that the social doctrine professed by the Catholic Church is something inseparable from the doctrine that it teaches about human life.

223
223. For this reason we strongly desire that this doctrine be studied more and more. We urge, first of all, that it be taught as a mandatory discipline in Catholic schools of all grades, and mainly in seminaries, although we know that in some centers of this type such teaching has been correctly taught for some time.

224
224. Now, for the greater dissemination of this social doctrine of the Catholic Church, we judge that lay Catholics can provide valuable collaboration if they learn it and practice it personally and, furthermore, make every effort to ensure that others are also convinced of its effectiveness.

225
225. Secular Catholics must be convinced that the way to demonstrate the goodness and effectiveness of this doctrine is to prove that it can solve the social problems of the moment.

226
226. But a social doctrine should not be a matter of mere exposition. It must also be the object of practical application. This norm is valid above all when it comes to the social doctrine of the Church, whose light is truth, whose end is justice and whose primary impulse is love.

227
227. It is, therefore, of utmost importance that our children, in addition to being educated in social doctrine, are educated above all to practice it.

228
228. Christian education, in order to be described as complete, must extend to all kinds of duties. Consequently, it is necessary that Christians, moved by it, also adjust their economic and social activities to the doctrine of the Church.

229
229. The transition from theory to practice is always difficult by nature; But the difficulty increases when it comes to putting into practice a social doctrine like that of the Catholic Church. And this mainly for several reasons: first, because of the disordered self-love that nests deeply in man; second, due to the materialism that currently infiltrates modern society on a large scale, and third, due to the difficulty of sometimes determining the demands of justice in each specific case.

230
230. Therefore, it is not enough for Christian education, in harmony with the doctrine of the Church, to teach man the obligation that falls on him to act Christianly in the economic and social field, but, at the same time, it must teach him the practical way of appropriately fulfilling this obligation.

231
231. We judge, however, that this education of the Christian is insufficient if the collaboration of the disciple is not added to the effort of the teacher and if practice is not added to the teaching as an experiment.

232
232. Just as it is often said proverbially that, to honestly enjoy freedom, one must know how to use it righteously, in the same way no one learns to act in accordance with Catholic doctrine in economic and social matters if it is not really acting in this field and in accordance with the same doctrine.

233
233. For this reason, in the dissemination of this practical education of the Christian, a large part must be attributed to associations consecrated to the secular apostolate, especially those whose objective is the restoration of Christian morality as a fundamental task of the present moment, since their members can use their daily experiences to better educate first themselves, and then the young, in the fulfillment of these duties.

234
234. It is not alien to this purpose to remind everyone here, both the powerful and the humble, that the will to live soberly and to endure, with the grace of God, sacrifice is absolutely inseparable from the meaning that Christian wisdom has of life.

235
235. But, unfortunately, today an immoderate desire for pleasure has taken hold of many. In fact, there are not a few men for whom the supreme goal of life is to long for delights and quench the thirst of their passions, undoubtedly with serious damage to the spirit and also to the body. Now, whoever considers this question, even on the merely natural level of man, must confess that it is a wise and prudent measure to use reflection and temperance in all things and to restrain the passions.

236
236. Now, the general principles of a social doctrine are commonly put into practice through three phases: first, complete examination of the true state of the situation; second, exact assessment of this situation in light of the principles, and third, determination of what is possible or obligatory to apply the principles according to the circumstances of time and place. There are three phases of the same process that are usually expressed with these three verbs: see, judge and act.

237
237. From this follows the utmost convenience for young people not only to reflect on this order of activities, but also, as far as possible, to practice it in reality. In this way they will avoid believing that the knowledge learned should be the exclusive object of contemplation, without simultaneous development in practice.

238
238. It may, however, sometimes happen that, when it comes to applying the principles, divergences arise even among sincerely intentioned Catholics. When this happens, everyone should try to observe and witness mutual esteem and reciprocal respect, and at the same time examine the points of agreement that everyone can reach, in order to promptly carry out what needs require. They must also be very careful not to waste their energy in endless discussions, and, under the pretext of the best, not neglect to do the good that is possible and, therefore, obligatory for them.

239
239. But Catholics, in the exercise of their economic or social activities, sometimes enter into relationships with men who have a different conception of life. On such occasions, Catholics should try above all to always be consistent with themselves and not accept compromises that could damage the integrity of religion or morals. They must, however, at the same time, show themselves animated by a spirit of understanding for the opinions of others, completely disinterested and willing to collaborate loyally in the realization of those works that are by their nature good or, at least, can lead to good. But if on any occasion the ecclesiastical hierarchy orders or decrees something in this matter, it is evident that Catholics have the obligation to immediately obey these orders. The Church, in fact, has the right and duty to protect the integrity of the principles of ethical and religious order and, furthermore, to make known, by virtue of its authority, its criteria publicly, when it comes to applying these principles in practice.

240
240. The norms that we have given regarding education must necessarily be observed in daily life. This is a mission that corresponds mainly to our children of the laity, as they are generally engaged in the exercise of temporal activities and in the creation of institutions with the same purpose.

241
241. In exercising such a noble function, it is essential that lay people not only be competent in their respective profession and work in harmony with the laws suitable for the achievement of their purposes, but that they adjust their activity to the social principles and norms of the Church, in whose wisdom they must sincerely trust and whose commands they must obey with filial submission.

242
242. As we have already recalled, the men of our time have deepened and extended the investigation of the laws of nature; They have created new instruments to subject natural energies to their control; They have produced and continue to produce gigantic and spectacular works.

243
243. Our predecessor Pius «The masterpiece and monstrous work, at the same time, of this era, has been to transform man into a giant of the physical world at the expense of his spirit, reduced to a pygmy in the supernatural and eternal world» ( [+[0]+] ) p. 10).

244
244. Once again what the Psalmist affirmed about idolaters is verified today on a very large scale: that men often forget themselves in their practical conduct, while they admire their own works to the point of worshiping them as gods: "Their idols are silver and gold, the work of the hands of men" ([+[0]+] ), 4).

245
245. For this reason, our concern as universal Pastor of all souls obliges us to insistently exhort our children so that in the exercise of their activities and in the achievement of their goals they do not allow their sense of responsibility to be paralyzed or forget the order of the supreme goods.

246
246. It is well known that the Church has always taught, and continues to teach, that scientific and technical progress and the consequent material well-being that follows from it are real goods and should be considered evident proof of the progress of human civilization.

247
247. We ardently desire, therefore, that the warning of the divine Master will resound as a perennial warning in the ears of our children: «What does it profit a man to gain the whole world if he loses his soul? Or what can a man give in exchange for his soul? ( [+[0]+] ).

248
248. Similar to the previous warnings is what the Church makes in relation to the obligatory rest on holidays.

249
249. To defend the dignity of man as a being created by God and endowed with a soul made in the divine image, the Catholic Church has always urged faithful observance of the third commandment of the Decalogue: "Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy" ( [+[0]+] ).

250
250. But it is also a right and a necessity for man to take a break from the hard daily work, not only to provide rest to his tired body and honest distraction to his senses, but also to look after the unity of his family, which demands frequent contact and serene coexistence from all its members.

251
251. Religion, morality and hygiene therefore jointly require periodic rest. The Catholic Church, for its part, has for many centuries ordered that the faithful observe the Sunday rest and attend the holy sacrifice of the mass, which is the same memorial time and application to souls of the redemptive work of Christ.

252
252. However, with deep pain in our spirit we observe a fact that we must condemn. There are many who, perhaps without the intention of violating this holy law, frequently fail to comply with the sanctification of holidays, which necessarily causes serious damage to both the spiritual health and the bodily vigor of our beloved workers.

253
253. In the name of God, and keeping in view the spiritual and material well-being of humanity, We call upon all, authorities, businessmen and workers, to strive to observe this precept of God and the Church and to remember the serious responsibility that they undertake in this matter before God and before society.

254
254. No one, however, should deduce from what we have just briefly explained that our children, especially lay people, would act prudently if they collaborated reluctantly in the specific task of Christians, ordered to the realities of this temporal life; On the contrary, we declare once again that this task must be fulfilled and carried out with ever more intense zeal.

255
255. In reality, Jesus Christ, in the solemn prayer for the unity of his Church, made this request to the Father on behalf of his disciples: "I do not ask that you take them from the world, but that you keep them from evil" ([+[0]+]).

256
256. On the contrary, it fully responds to the plan of Providence that each man achieves his own perfection through the exercise of his daily work, which for almost all human beings entails a temporal content. For this reason, currently the arduous mission of the Church consists of adjusting the progress of present civilization with the norms of human culture and the evangelical spirit. This mission is demanded by our time, moreover, it is demanding it loudly, to achieve higher goals and consolidate without any damage those already achieved. To this end, as we have already said, the Church asks above all for the collaboration of the laity, who, for this very reason, are obliged to work in such a way in the resolution of temporal problems, that in fulfilling their obligations towards their neighbor they do so in spiritual union with God through Christ and for the increase of divine glory, as the apostle Saint Paul commands: "Now then, eat, now drink, now do anything else, do everything to the glory of God" ( [+[0]+] ). And in another place: "Whatever you do, in word or deed, do it in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him" ​​( [+[1]+] ).

257
257. When the human activities and institutions of the present life also contribute to the spiritual benefit and eternal bliss of man, it is necessary to recognize that they are developed more effectively for the achievement of the ends to which they immediately tend by their very nature. The luminous word of the divine Master has a permanent value: "Seek therefore first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all the rest will be given to you in addition" ([+[0]+]). Because, he who has been made as light in the Lord ( [+[1]+] ), and walks as a child of light ( [+[2]+] ), grasps with more accurate judgment the demands of justice in the different spheres of human activity, even in those that offer greater difficulties due to the widespread selfishness of individuals, nations or races.

258
258. We do not want, however, to conclude this our encyclical without reminding you, venerable brothers, of an extremely transcendental and true chapter of Catholic doctrine, by which we are taught that we are living members of the mystical Body of Christ, which is the Church: "For just as the body, being one, has many members, and all the members of the body, although they are many, are one body, so is Christ" ([+[0]+]).

259
259. We therefore insistently exhort our children throughout the world, both clergy and laity, to seek to be fully aware of the great nobility and dignity that they possess by being grafted into Christ like the branches into the vine: "I am the vine, you are the branches" ([+[0]+]), and because they are allowed to participate in the divine life of Him.

260
260. Although we must recognize that our century suffers from very serious errors and is shaken by profound disorders, nevertheless, ours is a time in which immense horizons of apostolate are opening up for the workers of the Church, awakening great hope in our spirits.

261
261. Venerable brothers and dear children, we have deduced a series of principles and norms, whose intense meditation and implementation, to the extent possible to each one, we insistently exhort you. Because, if each and every one of you gives this collaboration with a determined spirit, a great step will necessarily have been taken in the establishment of the kingdom of Christ on earth, which "is a kingdom of truth and life, a kingdom of holiness and grace, a kingdom of justice, love and peace" ([+[0]+]); kingdom from which we will depart one day towards eternal happiness, for which we have been created by God and to which we ardently desire to reach.

262
262. This is, in effect, the doctrine of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, mother and teacher of all peoples, whose light illuminates, ignites, inflames; whose admonishing voice, because it is full of eternal wisdom, serves for all times; whose virtue always offers remedies as effective as they are adequate for the growing needs of humanity and for the worries and anxieties of the present life.

263
263. These are the wishes, venerable brothers, that We formulate at the end of this letter, to which we have long consecrated our concern for the universal Church; We formulate them, so that the divine Redeemer of men, "who has become for us, from God, wisdom, justice, sanctification and redemption" ([+[0]+]), reigns and triumphs happily throughout the centuries, in everyone and above all; We also formulate them so that, once the correct social order is restored, all peoples can finally enjoy prosperity, joy and peace.
