1
1. “I will give you shepherds according to my heart” ( [+[0]+] ).

2
2. Remain faithful to the grace received! In fact, the gift of God does not annul man's freedom, but rather promotes it, develops it and demands it.

3
3. In line with the Second Vatican Council on the Order of priests and their formation, and wishing to concretely apply this rich and proven doctrine to various situations, the Church has on many occasions faced the problems of the life, ministry and formation of priests.

4
4. In the typical ecclesial experience of the Synod, that "singular experience of episcopal communion in universality, which reinforces the sense of the universal Church, the responsibility of the Bishops in relation to the universal Church and its mission, in affective and effective communion around Peter", the voice of the various particular Churches has been clearly heard, and in this Synod, for the first time, that of some Churches of the East. The Churches have proclaimed their faith in the fulfillment of God's promise: "I will give you Shepherds according to my heart" ([+[0]+]), and have renewed their pastoral commitment to care for vocations and the training of priests, with the conviction that the future of the Church, its development and its universal mission of salvation depend on it.

5
5. "Every High Priest is taken from among men and is placed in favor of men in regard to God" ( [+[0]+] ).

6
6. Multiple factors seem to favor in today's men a more mature awareness of the dignity of the person and a new openness to religious values, the Gospel and the priestly ministry.

7
7. But many problematic or negative elements are related to these and other positive factors.

8
8. The numerous contradictions and possibilities presented by our societies and cultures and, at the same time, by ecclesial communities, are perceived, lived and experienced with a very particular intensity by the world of young people, with immediate and more incisive repercussions than ever in their educational process. In this sense, the birth and development of the priestly vocation in children, adolescents and young people continually encounter obstacles and stimuli.

9
9. However, there is no shortage of positive situations and stimuli, which arouse and nourish in the hearts of adolescents and young people a new availability, as well as a true search for ethical and spiritual values, which by their nature offer favorable ground for a vocational path to the total surrender of themselves to Christ and the Church in the priesthood.

10
10. The complex current situation, briefly explained through allusions and by way of example, demands not only to be known, but above all, to be interpreted. Only in this way can the fundamental question be adequately answered: How to train priests who are truly up to the times, capable of evangelizing today's world?

11
11. “In the synagogue all eyes were fixed on him” ( [+[0]+] ). What the evangelist Saint Luke says about those who were present that Saturday in the synagogue of Nazareth, listening to the commentary that Jesus would make on the text of the prophet Isaiah read by himself, can be applied to all Christians, called to always recognize in Jesus of Nazareth the definitive fulfillment of the prophetic announcement: "So he began to say to them: This Scripture, which you have just heard, has been fulfilled today" ([+[1]+]). And the “scripture” was this: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor, he has sent me to proclaim release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to set free the oppressed and to proclaim a year of favor from the Lord” ([+[2]+]). Indeed, Jesus presents himself as filled with the Spirit, "anointed to announce the Good News to the poor"; He is the Messiah, the Messiah priest, prophet and king.

12
12. "Priestly identity," the Synod Fathers have affirmed, "like all Christian identity, has its source in the Holy Trinity," which reveals itself and communicates itself to men in Christ, constituting in Him and through the Spirit the Church as "the germ and the beginning of that kingdom." The Exhortation Christifideles laici, summarizing the conciliar teaching, presents the Church as mystery, communion and mission: she "is a mystery because the love and life of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are the absolutely free gift offered to those who have been born of water and the Spirit ( [+[0]+] ), called to revive the very communion of God and to manifest and communicate it in history ( [+[1]+] )."

13
13. Jesus Christ has manifested in himself the perfect and definitive face of the priesthood of the new Covenant. He has done this in his earthly life, but above all in the central event of his passion, death and resurrection.

14
14. In the service of this universal priesthood of the new Covenant, Jesus called with him, during his earthly mission, some disciples ( [+[0]+] ) and with a specific authority and mandate he called and constituted the Twelve to "be with him, and to send them to preach with power to cast out demons" ( [+[1]+] ).

15
15. In turn, the apostles instituted by the Lord will carry out their mission by calling, in diverse but all convergent ways, other men, such as Bishops, priests and deacons, to fulfill the mandate of the risen Jesus, who has sent them to all men of all times.

16
16. The priest's fundamental relationship is that which unites him with Jesus Christ, Head and Shepherd. Thus he participates, in a specific and authentic way, in the “anointing” and “mission” of Christ ( [+[0]+] ). But closely linked to this relationship is the one it has with the Church. These are not "relationships" that are simply close to each other, but are internally united in a kind of mutual immanence. The relationship with the Church is inscribed in the one and the same relationship of the priest with Christ, in the sense that the "sacramental representation" of Christ is what establishes and animates the relationship of the priest with the Church.

17
17. The ordained ministry, by its very nature, can be carried out only to the extent that the priest is united with Christ through sacramental insertion into the priestly order, and therefore to the extent that he is in hierarchical communion with the Bishop himself. The ordained ministry has a radical "community form" and can be exercised only as "a collective task." The Council has spoken at length about this character of communion of the priesthood, clearly examining the relationship of the priest with the Bishop himself, with the other priests and with the lay faithful.

18
18. As the Council emphasizes, "the spiritual gift that priests received at ordination does not prepare them for a limited and restricted mission, but for the universal and very broad mission of salvation to the ends of the world, since any priestly ministry participates in the same universal breadth of the mission entrusted by Christ to the Apostles." By the very nature of their ministry, they must therefore be filled and animated by a profound missionary spirit and "a genuinely Catholic spirit that accustoms them to transcending the limits of their own diocese, nation or rite and projecting themselves into generous help to the needs of the entire Church and with a spirit willing to preach the Gospel everywhere."

19
19. “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me” ( [+[0]+] ). The Spirit is not simply on the Messiah, but fills him, penetrates him, invades his being and his actions. Indeed, the Spirit is the beginning of the consecration and mission of the Messiah: because he has anointed me to announce the Good News to the poor... ( [+[1]+] ). By virtue of the Spirit, Jesus belongs totally and exclusively to God, he participates in the infinite holiness of God who calls, chooses and sends him. Thus the Spirit of the Lord manifests itself as a source of holiness and a call to sanctification.

20
20. The Council Decree on the Ministry and Life of Priests offers us a rich and encouraging synthesis of the "spiritual life" of priests and of the gift and responsibility of becoming "saints." «By the sacrament of Orders, priests are configured with Christ the priest, as ministers of the Head, to build and edify his entire Body, which is the Church, as cooperators of the Episcopal Order. It is true that already in the consecration of baptism - like all the faithful of Christ - they received the sign and gift of such a great vocation and grace, so that, even with human weakness, they can and should aspire to perfection, according to the word of the Lord: "Be ye therefore perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect" ([+[0]+]). Now, priests are obliged in a special way to achieve this perfection, since, consecrated in a new way to God by the reception of the Order, they become living instruments of Christ, eternal Priest, to continue in time the admirable work of him who, with heavenly efficiency, reintegrated the entire human race. Therefore, since every priest specifically personifies Christ himself, he is also enriched with particular grace so that he can better achieve, through the service of the faithful entrusted to him and the entire People of God, the perfection of Him whom he represents, and heal the human weakness of the flesh the holiness of Him who was made for us pontiff "holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners" ( [+[1]+] )."

21
21. Through sacramental consecration, the priest is configured with Jesus Christ, as Head and Pastor of the Church, and receives as a gift a "spiritual power", which is a participation in the authority with which Jesus Christ, through his Spirit, guides the Church.

22
22. The image of Jesus Christ, Shepherd of the Church, his flock, once again proposes, with new and more suggestive nuances, the same contents of the image of Jesus Christ, Head and Servant. Verifying the prophetic announcement of the Savior Messiah, joyfully sung by the psalmist and the prophet Ezekiel ( [+[0]+] ), Jesus presents himself as "the good Shepherd" ( [+[1]+] ), not only of Israel, but of all men ( [+[2]+] ). And his life is an uninterrupted manifestation, indeed, a daily realization of his "pastoral charity." He feels compassion for the people, because they are tired and downcast, like sheep without a shepherd ( [+[3]+] ); He looks for the scattered and the lost ( [+[4]+] ) and celebrates when he finds them, he collects and defends them, he knows them and calls them one by one ( [+[5]+] ), he leads them to the fresh pastures and calm waters ( [+[6]+] ), for them he prepares a table, feeding them with his own life. This life is offered by the good Shepherd with his death and resurrection, as the Roman liturgy of the Church sings: «The good Shepherd who gave his life for his sheep and deigned to die for his flock has risen. Alleluia".

23
23. The interior principle, the virtue that animates and guides the spiritual life of the priest as configured with Christ Head and Shepherd, is pastoral charity, participation in the same pastoral charity of Jesus Christ: free gift of the Holy Spirit and, at the same time, duty and call to the free and responsible response of the priest.

24
24. The Spirit of the Lord has consecrated Christ and sent him to announce the Gospel ( [+[0]+] ). The mission is not an extrinsic or juxtaposed element to the consecration, but rather constitutes its intrinsic and vital purpose: the consecration is for the mission. In this way, not only the consecration, but also the mission is under the sign of the Spirit, under its sanctifying influence.

25
25. It is essential, for a spiritual life that develops through the exercise of ministry, that the priest continually renew and increasingly deepen the awareness of being a minister of Jesus Christ, by virtue of sacramental consecration and configuration with Him, Head and Shepherd of the Church.

26
26. Thanks to the precious teaching of the Second Vatican Council, we can remember the conditions and demands, the modalities and fruits of the intimate relationship that exists between the spiritual life of the priest and the exercise of his triple ministry: the Word, the Sacrament and the service of Charity.

27
27. “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me” ( [+[0]+] ). The Holy Spirit received in the sacrament of Orders is a source of holiness and a call to sanctification, not only because it configures the priest with Christ, Head and Shepherd of the Church, and entrusts him with the prophetic, priestly and royal mission to carry out by personifying Christ, but also because it animates and vivifies his daily existence, enriching it with gifts and demands, with virtues and strengths, which are summarized in pastoral charity. This charity is a unifying synthesis of evangelical values ​​and virtues and, at the same time, the force that sustains their development to Christian perfection.

28
28. "Among the most necessary virtues in the ministry of priests, let us remember the disposition of mind to always be ready to seek not one's own will, but the fulfillment of the will of the one who sent them ( [+[0]+] )." It is about obedience, which, in the case of the spiritual life of the priest, presents some peculiar characteristics.

29
29. Among the evangelical counsels – says the Council – “the precious gift of divine grace stands out, granted to some by the Father ([+[0]+]), so that they consecrate themselves to God alone with a heart that in virginity and celibacy remains more easily undivided ([+[1]+]). This perfect continence for the kingdom of heaven has always been held in the highest esteem by the Church, as a sign and stimulus of charity and as an extraordinary source of spiritual fruitfulness in the world. In virginity and celibacy, chastity maintains its original meaning, namely, that of a human sexuality lived as an authentic manifestation and precious service to the love of communion and interpersonal donation. This meaning subsists fully in virginity, which realizes, in the renunciation of marriage, the "nuptial meaning" of the body through a communion and a personal donation to Jesus Christ and his Church, which prefigure and anticipate the perfect and definitive communion and donation of the hereafter: "In virginity man awaits, even bodily, the eschatological wedding of Christ with the Church, giving himself totally to the Church in the hope that Christ gives himself to it in fullness." truth of eternal life.

30
30. The Synod Fathers have given a very concise and profound description of evangelical poverty, presenting it as "submission of all goods to the supreme Good of God and his Kingdom." In reality, only he who contemplates and lives the mystery of God as the only and supreme Good, as true and definitive Wealth, can understand and live poverty, which is certainly not contempt and rejection of material goods, but rather the grateful and cordial use of these goods and, at the same time, the joyful renunciation of them with great interior freedom, that is, made by God and obeying his designs.

31
31. Like all authentically Christian spiritual life, that of the priest also has an essential and inalienable ecclesial dimension: it is participation in the holiness of the Church itself, which in the Creed we profess as the "Communion of Saints." The holiness of the Christian derives from that of the Church, expresses it and at the same time enriches it. This ecclesial dimension has particular modalities, purposes and meanings in the spiritual life of the priest, due to his special relationship with the Church, always based on his configuration with Christ, Head and Shepherd, in his ordained ministry, in his pastoral charity.

32
32. Membership and dedication to a particular Church do not limit the activity and life of the priest, since, given the very nature of the particular Church and the priestly ministry, they cannot be reduced to narrow limits. The Council teaches about this: «The spiritual gift that priests received at ordination does not prepare them for a limited and restricted mission, but for the universal and very broad mission of salvation "to the ends of the earth" ([+[0]+]), since any priestly ministry participates in the same universal breadth of the mission entrusted by Christ to the Apostles».

33
33. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to announce the Good News to the poor..." ( [+[0]+] ). Jesus also makes the words he spoke in the synagogue of Nazareth resonate in our hearts as priests today. Indeed, our faith reveals to us the operative presence of the Spirit of Christ in our being, in our actions and in our living, just as it has been configured, enabled and shaped by the sacrament of Holy Orders.

34
34. “Come and see” ( [+[0]+] ). In this way Jesus responds to the two disciples of John the Baptist, who asked him where he lived. In these words we find the meaning of vocation.

35
35. Every Christian vocation finds its foundation in the free and preceding election on the part of the Father, “who from heaven above has blessed us through Christ with all kinds of spiritual goods. He chose us in Christ before the creation of the world, so that we would be his people and remain blameless in his presence. Carried away by his love, he destined us in advance, according to the good pleasure of his will, to be adopted as his children, through Jesus Christ” ( [+[0]+] ).

36
36. The history of every priestly vocation, as well as of every Christian vocation, is the history of an ineffable dialogue between God and man, between the love of God who calls and the freedom of man who responds to God in love. These two inseparable aspects of the vocation, the free gift of God and the responsible freedom of man, appear clearly and effectively in the very brief words with which the evangelist Saint Mark presents the vocation of the twelve: Jesus "went up on a mountain, and calling those whom he wanted, they came to him" ([+[0]+]). On the one hand there is the absolutely free decision of Jesus and on the other, the "coming" of the twelve, that is, the "following" of Jesus.

37
37. "Depressed by these words, he left saddened, because he had many possessions" ( [+[0]+] ). The rich young man of the Gospel, who does not follow the call of Jesus, reminds us of the obstacles that can block or extinguish man's free response: not only can material goods close the human heart to the values ​​of the spirit and the radical demands of the Kingdom of God, but also some social and cultural conditions of our time can represent many threats and impose deviated and false visions about the true nature of the vocation, making difficult, if not impossible, its reception and its very understanding.

38
38. Certainly the vocation is an inscrutable mystery that implies the relationship that God establishes with man, as a unique and unrepeatable being, a mystery perceived and felt as a call that awaits a response in the depths of conscience, that is, in that "tabernacle of man, in which he sits alone with God, whose voice resonates in his own intimacy." But this does not eliminate the community and, more specifically, ecclesiastical dimension of the vocation: the Church is truly present and active in the vocation of each priest.

39
39. In the exercise of its prophetic mission, the Church feels as urgent and inalienable the duty to announce and witness to the Christian meaning of vocation: what we could call "the Gospel of vocation." Also in this field he discovers the urgency of the apostle's words: "Woe to me if I do not evangelize!" ( [+[0]+] ). This exclamation resonates primarily for us pastors and refers, together with us, to all educators in the Church. Preaching and catechesis must always manifest their intrinsic vocational dimension: the Word of God enlightens believers to value life as a response to God's call and accompanies them to welcome in faith the gift of personal vocation.

40
40. As a real People, the Church knows itself to be rooted and animated by the "law of the Spirit who gives life" ([+[0]+]), which is essentially the royal law of charity ([+[1]+]) or the perfect law of freedom ([+[2]+]). That is why it fulfills its mission when it guides each of the faithful to discover and live their own vocation in freedom and to realize it in charity.

41
41. The priestly vocation is a gift from God, which certainly constitutes a great good for those who are its first recipient. But it is also a gift for the entire Church, a good for its life and mission. That is why the Church is called to guard this gift, to esteem it and love it. She is responsible for the birth and maturation of priestly vocations. Consequently, vocational pastoral care has as an active subject, as protagonist, the ecclesial community as such, in its various expressions: from the universal Church to the particular Church and, analogously, from the latter to the parish and all levels of the People of God.

42
42. «He went up to the mountain and called those whom he wanted: and they came to him. He instituted Twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might send them to preach with the power to cast out demons” ( [+[0]+] ).

43
43. "Without adequate human formation, all priestly formation would be deprived of its necessary foundation." This affirmation of the Synod Fathers expresses not only a fact suggested daily by reason and verified by experience, but a requirement that finds its deepest and most specific motives in the very nature of the priest and his ministry.

44
44. Emotional maturity means being aware of the central position of love in human existence. In reality, as I pointed out in the encyclical Redemptor hominis, “man cannot live without love. He remains an incomprehensible being for himself, his life is deprived of meaning if love is not revealed to him, if he does not encounter love, if he does not experience it and make it his own, if he does not participate vividly in it.

45
45. Human formation itself, if it develops in the context of an anthropology that encompasses the entire truth about man, opens and is completed in spiritual formation. Every man, created by God and redeemed with the blood of Christ, is called to be regenerated "by water and the Spirit" ( [+[0]+] ) and to be "a son in the Son." In this effective plan of God is the foundation of the constitutively religious dimension of the human being, intuited and recognized also by simple reason: man is open to the transcendent, to the absolute; He has a heart that is restless until he rests in the Lord.

46
46. The conciliar text deserves careful and loving meditation, from which some fundamental values and demands of the spiritual path of the candidate for the priesthood can easily be drawn.

47
47. An essential element of spiritual formation is the meditated and prayerful reading of the Word of God ( [+[0]+] ); It is humble and loving listening that becomes eloquent. Indeed, it is in the light and with the strength of the Word of God that one can discover, understand, love and follow one's own vocation; and also fulfill one's own mission, to such a point that all existence finds its unitary and radical meaning in being the end of the Word of God that calls man, and the beginning of the word of man that responds to God. Familiarity with the Word of God will facilitate the journey of conversion, not only in the sense of turning away from evil to adhere to good, but also in the sense of nourishing the thoughts of God in the heart, so that faith, in response to the Word, becomes the new criterion for judging and evaluating men and things, events and problems.

48
48. The culmination of Christian prayer is the Eucharist, which in turn is "the summit and source" of the Sacraments and the Liturgy of the Hours. For the spiritual formation of every Christian, and especially of every priest, liturgical education is very necessary, in the full sense of a vital insertion into the paschal mystery of Jesus Christ, dead and risen, present and active in the sacraments of the Church. Communion with God, the support of all spiritual life, is a gift and fruit of the sacraments; and at the same time it is a duty and a responsibility that the sacraments entrust to the freedom of the believer, so that they live that communion in the decisions, options, attitudes and actions of their daily existence. In this sense, the "grace" that makes the Christian life "new" is the grace of the dead and risen Jesus Christ, who continues to pour out his holy and sanctifying Spirit in the sacraments; Likewise, the "new law", which must be the guide and norm of the Christian's existence, is written by the sacraments in the "new heart." And it is a law of charity towards God and brothers, as a response and extension of God's love for man, signified and communicated by the sacraments. The value of this "full, conscious and active" participation in sacramental celebrations is understood, thanks to the gift and action of that "pastoral charity" that constitutes the soul of the priestly ministry.

49
49. Spiritual formation also involves seeking Christ in men.

50
50. The spiritual formation of those who are called to live celibacy must devote particular attention to preparing the future priest to know, appreciate, love and live celibacy in its true nature and in its true purpose, and, therefore, in its evangelical, spiritual and pastoral motivations. The presupposition and content of this preparation is the virtue of chastity, which determines all human relationships and leads to experiencing and manifesting... a sincere, human, fraternal, personal love capable of sacrifice, following the example of Christ, with everyone and with each one.

51
51. Intellectual formation, although having its own specific character, is deeply related to human and spiritual formation, constituting a necessary element with them; In fact, it is like an irreplaceable demand of intelligence with which man, participating in the light of divine intelligence, tries to achieve a wisdom that, in turn, opens and advances to the knowledge of God and his adherence.

52
52. An essential moment of intellectual formation is the study of philosophy, which leads to a deeper knowledge and interpretation of the person, their freedom, their relationships with the world and with God. This is very urgent, not only because of the relationship that exists between philosophical arguments and the mysteries of salvation studied in theology in the superior light of faith, but also in the face of a widespread cultural situation, which exalts subjectivism as a criterion and measure of truth. Only a sound philosophy can help candidates for the priesthood develop a reflective awareness of the constitutive relationship between the human spirit and the truth, which is fully revealed to us in Jesus Christ. Nor should we underestimate the importance of philosophy to guarantee that "certainty of truth", the only one that can be the basis of total personal dedication to Jesus and the Church. It is not difficult to understand how some very concrete questions - such as the identity of the priest and his apostolic and missionary commitment - are deeply linked to the question, not at all abstract, of truth: if one is not sure of the truth, how can one put one's own life at stake and have the strength to seriously question the lives of others?

53
53. The intellectual formation of the future priest is based and built above all on the study of sacred doctrine and theology. The value and authenticity of theological training depends on scrupulous respect for the very nature of theology, which the Synod Fathers have summarized as follows: "True theology comes from faith and seeks to lead to faith." This is the conception that the Catholic Church has constantly taught through its Magisterium. This is also the line followed by the great theologians, who enriched the thought of the Catholic Church throughout the centuries. Saint Thomas is very explicit when he affirms that faith is like the habitus of theology, that is, its permanent operating principle, and that "all theology is ordered to nourish faith."

54
54. Theological formation is an extremely complex and demanding task. It must lead the candidate to the priesthood to possess a complete and unitary vision of the truths revealed by God in Jesus Christ and of the experience of faith of the Church; hence the double requirement of knowing "all" Christian truths and knowing them organically, without making arbitrary selections. This requires helping the student to develop a synthesis that is the result of the contributions of the various theological disciplines, whose specific character achieves authentic value only in the profound coordination of all of them.

55
55. Current theological formation must pay particular attention to some problems that often give rise to difficulties, tensions, and disorientation in the life of the Church. Think about the relationship between the statements of the Magisterium and theological discussions; relationship that does not always develop as it should be, that is, in the perspective of collaboration. Certainly "the living Magisterium of the Church and theology - even when performing diverse functions - ultimately have the same goal: to maintain the People of God in the truth that sets them free and to make them the "light of the nations." This service to the ecclesial community puts the theologian in a reciprocal relationship with the Magisterium. The latter authentically teaches the doctrine of the Apostles and, taking advantage of the theological work, responds to objections and deformations of the faith, also proposing, with the authority received from Jesus Christ, new depths, explanations and applications of the revealed doctrine. Theology, on the other hand, reflexively acquires an increasingly deeper understanding of the Word of God, contained in Scripture and faithfully transmitted by the living Tradition of the Church under the guidance of the Magisterium, while striving to clarify this teaching of Revelation against the demands of reason and giving it an organic and systematic form. But when, for a series of reasons, this collaboration decreases, it is necessary not to give in to misunderstandings and confusion, knowing how to carefully distinguish "the common doctrine of the Church, from the opinions of theologians and from the tendencies that fade with the passage of time ( [+[0]+] )." There is no "parallel" magisterium, because the only magisterium is that of Peter and the apostles, that of the Pope and the Bishops.

56
56. Following the teachings and guidelines of the Second Vatican Council and the norms of application of the Ratio fundamentalis institutionis sacerdotalis, a broad updating of the teaching of philosophical and, above all, theological disciplines in seminaries has taken place in the Church. Even though in some cases it needs further amendments or developments, this update has overall contributed to increasingly highlighting the educational project in the field of intellectual training. In this regard, "the Synod Fathers have affirmed again, frequently and clearly, the need - even more so, the urgency - for the fundamental curriculum to be applied in seminaries and houses of formation, both universal and that of each nation or Episcopal Conference."

57
57. The entire formation of candidates for the priesthood is aimed at preparing them in a specific way to communicate the charity of Christ, the good Shepherd. Therefore, this formation, in its various aspects, must have an essentially pastoral character. The conciliar decree Optatam totius clearly states this, referring to the major seminaries: «The education of students must tend to the formation of true shepherds of souls, after the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, Teacher, Priest and Shepherd. Therefore, they must prepare themselves for the ministry of the Word: to understand the word revealed by God better and better, to possess it through meditation, and to express it through speech and conduct; They must prepare themselves for the ministry of worship and sanctification, so that, praying and celebrating the sacred liturgical functions, they may exercise the work of salvation through the Eucharistic sacrifice and the sacraments; They must prepare themselves for the ministry of the Shepherd: so that they know how to represent before men Christ, who "did not come to be served, but to serve and give his life for the redemption of the world" ([+[0]+]), and, having become servants of all, win many ([+[1]+]).

58
58. Understood in this way, pastoral formation cannot be reduced to a simple apprenticeship, aimed at becoming familiar with a pastoral technique. The educational project of the seminary is responsible for a true initiation into the sensitivity of the pastor, to consciously and maturely assume his responsibilities, in the inner habit of assessing problems and establishing priorities and means of solution, always based on clear motivations of faith and according to the theological demands of the pastoral care itself.

59
59. Since pastoral activity is destined by its nature to animate the Church, which is essentially "mystery", "communion", and "mission", pastoral formation must know and live these ecclesial dimensions in the exercise of ministry.

60
60. The need for the major seminary - and an analogous religious house of formation - for the preparation of candidates for the priesthood, as was categorically affirmed by the Second Vatican Council, has been reiterated by the Synod with these words: "The institution of the major seminary, as an optimal place of formation, must be confirmed as a normal environment, even material, of a communal and hierarchical life, indeed, as a house appropriate for the formation of candidates for the priesthood, with superiors truly consecrated to this task. This institution has borne many fruits over the centuries and continues to bear fruit throughout the world.

61
61. The Seminary is, therefore, an educational ecclesial community, indeed, it is a special educational community. And what determines its physiognomy is the specific purpose, that is, the vocational accompaniment of future priests, and therefore the discernment of the vocation, the help to correspond to it and the preparation to receive the sacrament of Orders with the graces and responsibilities proper, by which the priest is configured with Jesus Christ, Head and Shepherd, and prepares and commits himself to share his mission of salvation in the Church and in the world.

62
62. The purpose and specific educational form of the major seminary requires that candidates for the priesthood enter it with some prior preparation. This preparation did not create - at least until a decade ago - particular problems, since the aspirants usually came from minor seminaries and the Christian life of the ecclesial communities easily offered discreet Christian instruction and education to everyone indiscriminately.

63
63. As long experience shows, the priestly vocation often has its first moment of manifestation in the years of pre-adolescence or in the very first years of youth. And even in those who decide to enter the Seminary later, it is not unusual to verify the presence of God's call in very earlier periods. The history of the Church is a continuous testimony of calls that the Lord makes at a tender age. Saint Thomas Aquinas, for example, explains Jesus' predilection towards the apostle John "because of his tender age" and draws from there the following conclusion: "this gives us to understand how God loves in a special way those who dedicate themselves to his service from their earliest youth."

64
64. Where there is no possibility of having the Minor Seminary – “necessary and very useful in many regions” – it is necessary to create other “institutions”, such as vocational groups for adolescents and young people. Although not permanent, these groups will be able to offer in a community environment a systematic guide for vocational analysis and growth. Even if they live as a family and frequent the Christian community that helps them in their formative path, these boys and young people should not be left alone. They need a particular group or a reference community on which to rely to follow the specific vocational itinerary that the gift of the Holy Spirit has begun in them.

65
65. Since the formation of aspirants to the priesthood belongs to the vocational pastoral care of the Church, it must be said that the Church as such is the community subject that has the grace and responsibility to accompany all those the Lord calls to be his ministers in the priesthood.

66
66. The educational community of the Seminary is organized around the various formators: the rector, the director or spiritual father, the superiors and the teachers. They must feel deeply united to the Bishop, whom they represent with different titles and in different ways, and there must be a convinced and cordial communion and collaboration between them. This unity of educators not only makes possible an adequate implementation of the educational program, but also and above all offers future priests a significant example and access to that ecclesial communion that constitutes a fundamental value of Christian life and pastoral ministry.

67
67. Those who introduce and accompany future priests in sacred doctrine through theological teaching have a particular educational responsibility, which often – as experience teaches – is more decisive than that of other educators, in the development of the priestly personality.

68
68. The communities from which the candidate for the priesthood comes, even taking into account the separation that the vocational option entails, continue to exert a not indifferent influence on the formation of the future priest. That is why they must be aware of their specific part of responsibility.

69
69. Finally, we cannot forget that the same aspirant to the priesthood is also a necessary and irreplaceable protagonist of his formation: all formation - including priestly formation - is ultimately a self-formation. No one can replace us in the responsible freedom that each of us has as a person.

70
70. “I recommend that you rekindle the charisma of God that is in you” ( [+[0]+] ).

71
71. The ongoing formation of priests, both diocesan and religious, is the natural and absolutely necessary continuation of that process of structuring the priestly personality initiated and developed in the Seminary or in the religious House, through the training process for Ordination.

72
72. A first in-depth study refers to the human dimension of priestly formation. In dealing with men and in daily life, the priest must increase and deepen that human sensitivity that allows him to understand needs and welcome prayers, intuit unexpressed questions, share hopes and expectations, the joys and work of ordinary life; being able to find everyone and dialogue with everyone. Above all, by knowing and sharing, that is, making his own, the human experience of pain in its multiple manifestations, from destitution to illness, from marginalization to ignorance, to loneliness, to material and moral poverty, the priest enriches his own humanity and makes it more authentic and transparent, in a growing and passionate love for man.

73
73. The diverse and complementary aspects of ongoing formation help us grasp its profound meaning, which is to help the priest to be and perform his function in the spirit and according to the style of Jesus the good Shepherd.

74
74. Ongoing formation helps the priest, in the "communion" Church, to mature in the awareness that his ministry is radically ordered to gather the family of God as a fraternity animated by charity and to bring it to the Father through Christ in the Holy Spirit.

75
75. Ongoing formation is intended to make the priest grow aware of his participation in the saving mission of the Church. In the Church as a mission, the ongoing formation of the priest is not only a necessary condition, but also an indispensable means to constantly focus the meaning of the mission and guarantee its faithful and generous realization. With this training the priest is helped to discover all the gravity, but at the same time all the wonderful grace of an obligation that cannot leave him alone - as Paul said: «Preaching the Gospel is for me no reason for glory; It is rather a duty that falls on me. And woe to me if I did not preach the Gospel! ( [+[0]+] )â and it is also a demand, explicit or implicit, that arises strongly from men, whom God tirelessly calls to salvation.

76
76. Ongoing formation, precisely because it is "permanent", must always accompany priests, that is, in any period and situation of their life, as well as in the various positions of ecclesial responsibility that are entrusted to them; all of this, taking into account, naturally, the possibilities and characteristics of age, living conditions and assigned tasks.

77
77. Ongoing formation is also a duty for middle-aged priests. In reality, there are many risks they can run, precisely because of their age, such as exaggerated activism and a certain routine in the exercise of ministry. Thus, the priest may be tempted to boast about himself as if his own personal experience, already demonstrated, did not have to be contrasted with anything or anyone. Frequently the priest suffers from a kind of dangerous interior fatigue, the result of difficulties and failures. The answer to this situation is offered by ongoing training, a continuous and balanced review of oneself and one's own activity, a constant search for motivations and means for one's own mission; In this way, the priest will keep his spirit vigilant and ready for the constant and always new requests for salvation that he receives as a "man of God."

78
78. The conditions in which, frequently and in many places, the ministry of priests currently develops do not make a serious commitment to formation easy: the multiplication of tasks and services; the complexity of human life in general and of Christian communities in particular; The activism and hustle and bustle typical of so many sectors of our society frequently deprive priests of the time and energy they need to "take care of themselves" ( [+[0]+] ).

79
79. In a certain way, it is precisely each priest who is primarily responsible in the Church for ongoing formation, since the duty âderived from the sacrament of Ordersâ€ falls on each one to be faithful to the gift of God and to the dynamism of daily conversion that is born from the same gift. The regulations or norms of the ecclesiastical authority in this regard, as well as the same example of other priests, are not enough to make ongoing formation desirable if the individual is not personally convinced of its necessity and determined to value its occasions, times and forms. Ongoing formation maintains the youth of the spirit, which no one can impose from outside, but which each one must continually find within. Only he who always keeps alive the desire to learn and grow possesses this "youth."

80
80. If every moment can be a "favorable time" ( [+[0]+] ) in which the Holy Spirit leads the priest to direct growth in prayer, study and awareness of his own pastoral responsibilities, there are nevertheless "privileged" moments, although they are more common and previously established.

81
81. There are many aids and means that can be used to make ongoing formation increasingly a valuable life experience for priests. Among these we must remember the various forms of common life among priests, always present in the history of the Church, although with different modalities and commitments: «Today we cannot fail to strongly recommend them, especially among those who live or are pastorally committed in the same place. In addition to promoting apostolic life and action, this common life of the clergy offers everyone, priests and laity, a luminous example of charity and unity.

82
82. “I will give you shepherds according to my heart” ( [+[0]+] ).
