1
1. The development of people and especially that of those who strive to escape hunger, misery, endemic diseases, ignorance; who seek a broader participation in the fruits of civilization, a more active appreciation of its human qualities; that are decisively oriented towards full development, is observed by the Church with attention. Just after the second Second Vatican Council, a renewed awareness of the demands of the evangelical message forces the Church to put itself at the service of men to help them grasp all the dimensions of this serious problem and convince them of the urgency of solidarity action in this decisive change in the history of humanity.

2
2. In his great encyclicals Rerum novarum, by Leo XIII; Quadragesimo anno, by Pius XI; Mater et magistra and Pacem in terris, by John XXIII – without speaking of the messages to the world of Pius XII – our predecessors did not fail in the duty they had to project the light of the Gospel on the social issues of their time.

3
3. Today the most important fact that everyone must be aware of is that the social issue has taken on a global dimension. John XXIII affirms this unequivocally, and the Council has echoed this affirmation in its Pastoral Constitution on the Church in the world today. This teaching is serious and its application is urgent. Hungry people today challenge, with dramatic accent, the opulent people. The Church suffers from this crisis of anguish, and calls on everyone to respond with love to the call of their brothers.

4
4. Before our elevation to the Supreme Pontificate, our two trips to Latin America ( [+[0]+] ) and Africa ( [+[1]+] ) already put us in immediate contact with the pitiful problems that afflict continents full of life and hope. Cloaked in universal fatherhood, we have been able, in our trips to the Holy Land and India, to see with our eyes and touch with our hands the very serious difficulties that overwhelm peoples of ancient civilization, in struggle with the problems of development. While the second Vatican Ecumenical Council was being held in Rome, providential circumstances led us to be able to speak directly to the United Nations General Assembly. In the face of such a large areopagus we were the lawyer of the poor people.

5
5. Finally, with the intention of responding to the vote of the Council and of specifying the contribution of the Holy See to this great cause of developing peoples, we have recently believed that it was our duty to create, among the central organizations of the Church, a Pontifical Commission in charge of "raising in the entire People of God the full knowledge of the function that current times ask of each one in order to promote the progress of the poorest peoples, to favor social justice among nations, to offer those who are less developed such help that allows them to provide, themselves and for themselves, their progress. Justice and Peace is its name and its program. We think that this program can and should bring together men of good will with our Catholic children and Christian brothers.

6
6. To be free from misery, to find one's own subsistence, health, and a stable occupation more securely; participate even more in responsibilities, outside of all oppression and sheltered from situations that offend their dignity as men; be more educated; In a word, to do, know and have more in order to be more: such is the aspiration of today's men, while a large number of them are condemned to live in conditions that make this legitimate desire illusory. On the other hand, the peoples who have recently achieved national independence feel the need to add to this political freedom an autonomous and dignified growth, social no less than economic, in order to ensure their citizens their full human development and occupy their rightful place in the concert of nations.

7
7. Given the breadth and urgency of the work that must be carried out, we have resources inherited from the past, even when they are insufficient. It must certainly be recognized that colonial powers have often pursued their own interest, their power or their glory, and that by withdrawing, they have sometimes left a vulnerable economic situation, linked, for example, to monoculture, whose economic performance is subject to abrupt and wide variations. But even recognizing the errors of a certain type of colonialism and its consequences, it is necessary at the same time to pay tribute to the qualities and achievements of the colonizers, who in so many abandoned regions have contributed their science and technique, leaving precious fruits of their presence. However incomplete, the established structures remain and have driven back ignorance and disease, established beneficial communications, and improved living conditions.

8
8. Accepting what has been said, it is very true that this preparation is notoriously insufficient to face the harsh reality of the modern economy. Left to itself, its mechanism leads the world towards an aggravation, not an attenuation, of the disparity in living standards: rich people enjoy rapid growth, while poor people develop slowly. The imbalance grows: some overproduce food products that others cruelly lack, and the latter see that their exports become uncertain.

9
9. At the same time, social conflicts have expanded to take on the dimensions of the world. The lively restlessness that has taken hold of the poor classes in countries that are becoming industrialized, now takes hold of those in which the economy is almost exclusively agrarian: the peasants also acquire the consciousness of their undeserved misery. Added to this is the scandal of hurtful disparities, not only in the enjoyment of goods, but even more so in the exercise of power. While in some regions an oligarchy enjoys a refined civilization, the rest of the population, poor and dispersed, is "deprived of almost all possibilities of personal initiative and responsibility, and many times even living in living and working conditions unworthy of the human person."

10
10. On the other hand, the clash between traditional civilizations and the innovations of industrial civilization breaks the structures that do not adapt to the new conditions. Its framework, often rigid, was the indispensable support of personal and family life, and the elderly cling to it, while the young avoid it, as a useless obstacle, to eagerly turn towards new forms of social life. The conflict between generations is thus aggravated by a tragic dilemma: either preserve ancestral institutions and beliefs and renounce progress; or open to techniques and civilizations that come from outside, but rejecting with the traditions of the past all its human wealth. In fact, the moral, spiritual and religious supports of the past give way very frequently, without ensuring insertion into the new world.

11
11. In this development, the temptation becomes so violent that it threatens to drag us towards promising but illusion-forging messianisms. Who does not see the dangers in this, of violent popular reactions, insurrectionary agitations and slides towards totalitarian ideologies? These are the details of the problem, the seriousness of which cannot escape anyone.

12
12. Faithful to the teachings and example of its divine Founder, who gave as a sign of his mission the announcement of the Good News to the poor ([+[0]+]), the Church has never stopped promoting the human elevation of the peoples, to whom it brought faith in Jesus Christ. At the same time as churches, its missionaries have built hospices and hospitals, schools and universities. By teaching the indigenous people how to make the most of natural resources, they have often protected them against the greed of foreigners. Without a doubt, their work, because it was human, was not perfect, and some were sometimes able to mix quite a few ways of thinking and living from their country of origin with the announcement of the authentic evangelical message. But they also knew how to cultivate and promote local institutions. In many regions, they knew how to place themselves among the precursors of material progress no less than of cultural elevation. It is enough to remember the example of Father Charles de Foucauld, who was judged worthy of being called, for his charity, the "Universal Brother", and who compiled a precious dictionary of the Tuareg language. We must pay tribute to these very often ignored precursors, impelled by the charity of Christ, as well as to their emulators and successors, who continue to dedicate themselves, even today, to the generous and selfless service of those they evangelize.

13
13. But from now on local and individual initiatives are no longer enough. The present situation of the world requires joint action that has as its starting point a clear vision of all economic, social, cultural and spiritual aspects. With the experience it has of humanity, the Church, without intending in any way to get involved in the politics of the States, "only desires one thing: to continue, under the guidance of the Paraclete Spirit, the very work of Christ, who came into the world to bear witness to the truth, to save and not to judge, to serve and not to be served." Founded to establish the kingdom of heaven on earth from now on and not to conquer an earthly power, it clearly states that the two fields are different, in the same way that the two powers, the ecclesiastical and the civil, are sovereign, each on its own terrain. But, living in history, she must "thoroughly scrutinize the signs of the times and interpret them in the light of the Gospel." Taking part in the best aspirations of men and suffering from not seeing them satisfied, she wishes to help them achieve their full development and this precisely because she proposes to them what she has as her own: a global vision of man and humanity.

14
14. Development is not reduced to simple economic growth. To be authentic, it must be comprehensive, that is, promote all men and the whole man. An eminent expert has emphasized with great accuracy: «We do not accept the separation of the economy from the human, the development of the civilizations in which it is inscribed. What counts for us is the man, each man, each group of men, even all of humanity.

15
15. In God's designs, each man is called to promote his own progress, because the life of every man is a vocation given by God for a specific mission. Since his birth, everyone has been given, as in germ, a set of aptitudes and qualities to make them bear fruit; Its flowering, the result of the education received in one's own environment and personal effort, will allow each one to orient themselves towards the destiny that has been proposed to them by the Creator. Endowed with intelligence and freedom, man is responsible for his growth, as well as for his salvation. Helped, and sometimes hindered, by those who educate him and surround him, each one always remains, whatever the influences that are exerted on him, the main architect of his success or his failure: by only the effort of his intelligence and his will, each man can grow in humanity, be worth more, be more.

16
16. On the other hand, this growth is not optional. In the same way that the entire creation is ordered to its Creator, the spiritual creature is obliged to spontaneously orient its life towards God, the first truth and sovereign good. It thus turns out that human growth constitutes a summary of our duties. Furthermore, this harmony of nature, enriched by personal and responsible effort, is called to surpass itself. Through his insertion in the living Christ, man has the path open towards a new progress, towards a transcendental humanism that gives him his greatest plenitude; This is the supreme goal of personal development.

17
17. But each man is a member of society, he belongs to all of humanity. And it is not just this or that man but all men are called to this full development. Civilizations are born, grow and die. But as the waves of the sea in the flow of the tide advance, each one a little further, on the sand of the beach, in the same way humanity advances along the path of history. Heirs of past generations and benefiting from the work of our contemporaries, we are obligated to all and cannot be disinterested in those who will come to further increase the circle of the human family. Universal solidarity, which is a fact and a benefit for everyone, is also a duty.

18
18. This personal and community growth would be compromised if the true scale of values were altered. The desire for what is necessary is legitimate, and working to achieve it is a duty: "He who does not want to work, should not eat" ([+[0]+] ). But the acquisition of temporal goods can lead to greed, the desire to have more and more, and the temptation to increase one's own power. The greed of individuals, families and nations can take over both the poorest and the richest, and give rise to a suffocating materialism in both.

19
19. Thus, having more, both for people and for people, is not the ultimate goal. All growth is ambivalent. Necessary to allow man to be more of a man, it locks him up as in a prison, from the moment he becomes the supreme good, which prevents him from looking beyond. Then hearts harden and spirits close; Men no longer unite out of friendship, but out of interest, which soon makes them oppose each other and disunite. The exclusive search for possession becomes an obstacle to the growth of the being and opposes its true greatness; For nations as for people, greed is the most obvious form of moral underdevelopment.

20
20. If to carry out development, technicians are needed, in an increasing number, for this same development, deep reflection thinkers who seek a new humanism are required even more, which allows modern man to find himself, assuming the higher values of love, friendship, prayer and contemplation. In this way, true development will be able to be realized in all its fullness, which is the passage, for each one and for all, from less human conditions of life to more human conditions.

21
21. Less human: the material deficiencies of those who are deprived of the vital minimum and the moral deficiencies of those who are mutilated by selfishness. Less human: oppressive structures, which come from the abuse of having or the abuse of power, from the exploitation of workers or from the injustice of transactions. More human: the rise from misery to the possession of what is necessary, the victory over social calamities, the expansion of knowledge, the acquisition of culture. More human too: the increase in consideration of the dignity of others, the orientation towards the spirit of poverty ([+[0]+]), cooperation in the common good, the will for peace. Even more human: the recognition, by man, of the supreme values, and of God, who is their source and end. More human, finally and especially: faith, a gift of God accepted by the good will of men, and unity in the charity of Christ, who calls us all to participate, as children, in the life of the living God, Father of all men.

22
22. Fill the earth, and subdue it ( [+[0]+] ). The Bible, from its first pages, teaches us that the entire creation is for man, who has to apply his intelligent effort to value it and, through his work, perfect it, so to speak, putting it at his service. If the earth is made to provide each person with the means of subsistence and the instruments of his progress, every man has the right to find on it what he needs. The recent Council has recalled this: "God has destined the earth and everything contained in it for the use of all men and all peoples, so that created goods must reach everyone in a just manner, according to the rule of justice, inseparable from charity." All other rights, whatever they may be, including those of property and free trade, are subordinate to this: they should not hinder, but on the contrary, facilitate their realization, and it is a serious and social duty. It is urgent to return them to their primary purpose.

23
23. "If anyone has the goods of this world and, seeing his brother in need, closes his bowels to him, how is it possible that the love of God resides in him?" ( [+[0]+] ). It is known how firmly the Fathers of the Church have specified what the attitude of those who have towards those who are in need should be: «It is not part of your goods – so says Saint Ambrose – what you give to the poor; What you give him belongs to him. Because what has been given for the use of all, you appropriate it. The land has been given for everyone and not just for the rich. That is to say, private property does not constitute an unconditional and absolute right for anyone. There is no reason to reserve for exclusive use what exceeds one's own needs when others lack what is necessary. In a word: "the right of property should never be exercised to the detriment of the common utility, according to the traditional doctrine of the Fathers of the Church and the great theologians." If a conflict arises "between acquired private rights and primary community demands," it is up to public powers to "seek a solution with the active participation of people and social groups."

24
24. The common good, therefore, sometimes requires expropriation if, due to its extension, its deficient or non-existent exploitation, the misery that results from it to the population, the considerable damage caused to the interests of the country, some possessions serve as an obstacle to collective prosperity.

25
25. Necessary for economic growth and human progress, industrialization is both a sign and a factor of development. Man, through the tenacious application of his intelligence and his work, little by little extracts its secrets from nature and makes better use of its riches. At the same time that he disciplines his habits, he develops a taste for research and invention, acceptance of calculated risk, audacity in undertakings, generous initiative and a sense of responsibility.

26
26. But, unfortunately, on these new conditions of society a system has been built that considers profit as the essential engine of economic progress; competition, as the supreme law of the economy; private prosperity of the means of production, as an absolute right, without limits or corresponding social obligations. This unbridled liberalism, which leads to dictatorship, was precisely denounced by Pius XI as the generator of "international money imperialism." There is no better way to rebuke such abuse than by solemnly remembering once again that the economy is at the service of man. But if it is true that a certain capitalism has been the cause of much suffering, injustice and fratricidal struggles, the effects of which still last, it would be unfair to attribute to industrialization itself the evils that are due to the disastrous system that accompanies it. On the contrary, it is fair to recognize the irreplaceable contribution of the organization of work and industrial progress to the work of development.

27
27. In the same way, although there can sometimes be an exaggerated mystique of work, it is no less true, however, that work has been willed and blessed by God. Created in his image, "man must cooperate with the Creator in the perfection of creation and, in turn, mark the earth with the spiritual character that he himself has received." God, who has given man intelligence, has also given him the way to finish his work in some way; Whether the artist or craftsman, employer, worker or peasant, every worker is a creator. By applying himself to a material that resists him, the worker leaves a mark on it, while he acquires tenacity, ingenuity and a spirit of invention. Furthermore, living in common, participating in the same hope, suffering, ambition and joy, work unites wills, brings spirits closer together and melts hearts; By doing so, the men discover that they are brothers.

28
28. Work, undoubtedly ambivalent, because it promises money, joy and power, invites some to selfishness and others to revolt; It also develops professional conscience, a sense of duty and charity towards others. More scientific and better organized, it has the danger of dehumanizing those who perform it, becoming its servant, because work is not human if it does not remain intelligent and free. John XXIII recalled the urgency of restoring the worker's dignity, making him truly participate in the common work: "The company must tend to become a community of people in the relationships, functions and situation of all personnel." But the work of men, much more so for the Christian, still has the mission of collaborating in the creation of the supernatural world, not finished until we all come together to constitute that perfect man of whom Saint Paul speaks, "who realizes the fullness of Christ" ([+[0]+]).

29
29. You have to hurry. Many men suffer and the distance that separates the progress of some from the stagnation and even regression of others increases. However, it is necessary that the work to be carried out progress harmoniously, otherwise the balance that is essential will be broken. An improvised agrarian reform can defeat its purpose. A sudden industrialization can dislocate the structures that are still necessary, and generate social miseries, which would be a setback for humanity.

30
30. It is true that there are situations whose injustice cries out to heaven. When entire populations, lacking what is necessary, live in such a dependency that it prevents them from any initiative and responsibility, as well as from any possibility of cultural promotion and participation in social and political life, the temptation is great to reject with violence such great insults against human dignity.

31
31. However, as is known, revolutionary insurrection - except in cases of evident and prolonged tyranny that seriously violates the fundamental rights of the person and dangerously damages the common good of the country - engenders new injustices, introduces new imbalances and causes new ruins. You cannot combat a real evil at the price of a greater evil.

32
32. Let us understand well: the present situation must be faced courageously, and the injustices that it brings must be fought and overcome. Development requires bold, deeply innovative transformations. We must undertake, without waiting any longer, urgent reforms. Each one must generously accept their role, especially those who, due to their education, their situation and their power, have great possibilities for action. Let them, setting an example, begin with their own assets, as many of our brothers in the episcopate have already done. In this way they will respond to the expectations of men and will be faithful to the Spirit of God, because it is "the evangelical ferment that has raised and is raising in the heart of man an uncontrollable demand for dignity."

33
33. Individual initiative and the simple game of competition alone would not be enough to ensure the success of development. We must not risk further increasing the wealth of the rich and the power of the strong, thus confirming the misery of the poor and adding it to the servitude of the oppressed. Programs are necessary to "animate, stimulate, coordinate, supplement and integrate" the action of individuals and intermediate bodies. It is up to the public powers to choose and see how to impose the objectives to be proposed, the goals to be set, the means to reach them, at the same time stimulating all the forces grouped in this common action. But they must be careful to associate private initiatives and intermediate bodies with this company. They will thus avoid the risk of comprehensive collectivization or arbitrary planning that, by denying freedom, would exclude the exercise of the fundamental rights of the human person.

34
34. Because every program designed to increase production, at the end of the day, has no other reason for being than the service of the person. If it exists, it is to reduce inequalities, combat discrimination, free man from slavery, make him capable of being an agent responsible for his material improvement, his moral progress and his spiritual development. To say development is, indeed, to worry about both social progress and economic growth. It is not enough to increase common wealth so that it is distributed equitably. It is not enough to promote technology to make the earth more humanly habitable. The errors of those who have gone ahead should warn those who are in the process of development of the dangers that must be avoided in this field. The technocracy of tomorrow can engender evils no less fearsome than those of yesterday's liberalism. Economy and technology have no meaning if it is not for man, whom they must serve. Man is not truly man except to the extent that, master of his actions and judge of their importance, he himself becomes the author of his progress, according to the nature that has been given to him by his Creator, and of which he freely assumes the possibilities and demands.

35
35. It can also be stated that economic growth depends, first of all, on social progress; That is why basic education is the first objective of a development plan. Indeed, the hunger for instruction is no less depressing than the hunger for food: an illiterate person is an undernourished spirit. Knowing how to read and write, acquiring professional training, means regaining self-confidence and discovering that you can progress at the same time as others. As we said in our message to the 1965 UNESCO Congress in Tehran, literacy is for man “a primary factor of social integration, no less than of personal enrichment; for society, a privileged instrument of economic progress and development. That is why we are happy about the great work carried out in this domain by private initiatives, public powers and international organizations: they are the first architects of development, by enabling man to do it for himself.

36
36. But man does not achieve the fullness of himself except within the society to which he belongs, and in which the family has a primary function, which may perhaps have been excessive, depending on the times and places in which it has been exercised, to the detriment of the fundamental freedoms of the person. The old social frameworks of developing countries, although too rigid and poorly organized, must nevertheless be preserved for some time, progressively loosening their exaggerated dominance. But the natural, monogamous and stable family, as divine designs have conceived it ( [+[0]+] ) and which Christianity has sanctified, must remain "a point at which different generations coincide and help each other to achieve more complete wisdom and harmonize the rights of people with the other demands of social life."

37
37. It is true that accelerated demographic growth often adds its difficulties to development problems; The volume of the population is growing faster than the available resources and we find ourselves, apparently, locked in a dead end. The temptation is therefore great to stop demographic growth with radical measures. It is true that public powers, within the limits of their competence, can intervene, providing appropriate information and adopting appropriate measures, as long as they are in accordance with the requirements of the moral law and respect the just freedom of spouses. Without the inalienable right to marriage and procreation, there is no human dignity. Ultimately, it is up to parents to decide, with full knowledge of the facts, the number of their children, accepting their responsibilities before God, before the children they have already brought into the world and before the community to which they belong, following the demands of their conscience, instructed by the law of God authentically interpreted and sustained by trust in Him.

38
38. In the work of development, man, who finds his primary means of life in the family, is frequently helped by professional organizations. If its reason for being is to promote the interests of its members, its responsibility is great in view of the educational function that they can and at the same time must fulfill. Through the information they provide, the training they propose, they can do much to give everyone a sense of the common good and the obligations that this entails for each one.

39
39. Every social action implies a doctrine. The Christian cannot accept what is a materialist and atheistic philosophy, which respects neither the orientation of life towards its ultimate goal, nor human freedom or dignity. But as long as these values ​​remain safe, a pluralism of professional and union organizations is admissible, from a certain point of view it is useful, if it protects freedom and provokes emulation. That is why we pay a cordial tribute to all those who work in the selfless service of their brothers.

40
40. In addition to professional organizations, it is worth noting the activity of cultural institutions. Its role is no less important for the success of development: "The future of the world is in danger, the Council gravely affirms, if men more educated in this wisdom are not formed." And he adds: "Many nations that are economically poor, but richer in wisdom, can be of extraordinary use to others." Rich or poor, each country has a civilization, received from its elders: institutions required by earthly life and superior “artistic, intellectual and religious” manifestations of the life of the spirit. While these contain true human values, it would be a serious mistake to sacrifice them to the others. A people that allowed it would lose the best of itself and would sacrifice, in order to live, its reasons for living. Christ's teaching also applies to people: "What does it profit a man to gain the whole world if he loses his soul?" ( [+[0]+] ).

41
41. Poor people will never sufficiently protect themselves against this temptation that comes to them from rich people. These too often present, with the example of their successes in a technical and cultural civilization, the model of an activity applied mainly to the conquest of material prosperity. It is not that the latter closes the way by itself to spiritual activities. On the contrary, being "less a slave to things, he can more easily rise to the adoration and contemplation of the Creator himself." But, despite this, "modern civilization itself, certainly not by itself, but because it is excessively applied to earthly realities, can make access to God many times more difficult." In everything that is proposed to them, people in the development phase must, therefore, know how to choose, discern and eliminate false goods, which would bring with them a lowering of the level of the human ideal, accepting healthy and beneficial values ​​to develop them together with their own and according to their own character.

42
42. It is a complete humanism that must be promoted. What does this mean if not the integral development of every man and all men? A closed humanism, impenetrable to the values ​​of the spirit and to God, who is the source of them, could apparently triumph. Certainly, man can organize the earth without God, but “in the end, without God he cannot help but organize it against man. Exclusive humanism is an inhuman humanism. There is, therefore, nothing more than a true humanism that opens to the Absolute in the recognition of a vocation that gives the true idea of ​​human life. Far from being the ultimate norm of values, man does not fulfill himself unless he surpasses himself. According to Pascal's apt expression: "man infinitely surpasses man."

43
43. The integral development of man cannot occur without the solidarity development of humanity. We told each other in Bombay. «Man must meet man, nations must meet each other as brothers and sisters, as children of God. In this mutual understanding and friendship, in this sacred communion, we must also begin to act together to build the common future of humanity.

44
44. This duty concerns first of all the most favored.

45
45. «If a brother or sister is naked, says James, if they lack daily food, and one of you says to them: "walk in peace, be warm, be satisfied" without giving them what is necessary for their body, what good is that for them?» ( [+[0]+] ). Today, no one can ignore it, on entire continents there are countless men and women tortured by hunger, countless undernourished children. to such an extent that a good number of them die at a tender age; The physical growth and mental development of many others is thereby compromised, and entire regions are thus condemned to the saddest despondency.

46
46. Anguishing calls have already resounded. That of John XXIII was warmly received. We reiterated this in our Christmas message in 1963, and again in favor of India in 1966. The campaign against hunger undertaken by the International Food and Agriculture Organization ([+[0]+]), and encouraged by the Holy See, has been generously supported. Our Caritas International acts everywhere and many Catholics, under the impulse of our brothers in the episcopate, give and give of themselves without reserve in order to help those in need, progressively enlarging the circle of their neighbors.

47
47. But all this, like the private and public investments already made, the aid and loans granted, is not enough. It is not just about defeating hunger, nor even about reversing poverty. The fight against poverty, urgent and necessary, is insufficient. It is about building a world where every man, without exception of race, religion, or nationality, can live a fully human life, emancipated from the servitudes that come from men and from an insufficiently dominated nature; a world where freedom is not an empty word and where poor Lazarus can sit at the same table as the rich man ( [+[0]+] ). This requires a lot of generosity, innumerable sacrifices, and tireless effort from the latter. It is up to each person to examine their conscience, which has a new voice for our time. Are you willing to support the works and companies organized in favor of the poorest with your money? To pay more taxes so that public powers intensify their efforts for development? To buy imported products at a higher price in order to remunerate the producer more fairly? To expatriate yourself, if you are young, given the need to help this growth of young nations?

48
48. The duty of solidarity of people is also that of the people. "Already developed peoples have a very serious obligation to help developing countries." This conciliar teaching must be put into practice. If it is normal for a population to be the first beneficiary of the gifts granted by Providence as the fruit of its work, no people can, however, attempt to reserve its wealth for its exclusive use. Each town must produce more and better, both to give its subjects a truly human standard of living and to also contribute to the solidarity-based development of humanity. Given the growing poverty of underdeveloped countries, it should be considered normal for a developed country to dedicate a part of its production to satisfying their needs; It is equally normal to train educators, engineers, technicians, and scholars who put their science and competence at their service.

49
49. It must be said once again: the superfluities of rich countries must serve poor countries. The rule that formerly was valid in favor of those closest to us must be applied today to all the needs of the world. The rich, on the other hand, will be the first to benefit from it. If not, their prolonged greed will only provoke the judgment of God and the anger of the poor, with unforeseeable consequences. Retreating to their selfishness, the currently flourishing civilizations would violate their highest values, sacrificing the will to be more to the desire to possess greater abundance. And the parable of the rich man would be applied to this, whose land had produced a lot and who did not know where to store the harvest: "God says to him: foolish man, this very night they will ask for your soul" ([+[0]+]).

50
50. These efforts, in order to be fully effective, should not remain dispersed or isolated, and even less opposed for reasons of prestige or power: the situation requires concerted programs. In fact, a program is more and better than occasional help left to the good will of each person. It supposes, We have already told ourselves before, in-depth studies, setting the objectives, determining the means, combining efforts, in order to respond to present needs and foreseeable demands. Furthermore, it surpasses the perspectives of economic growth and social progress: it gives meaning and value to the work that must be done. By fixing the world, it consolidates and dignifies man more and more.

51
51. It will be necessary to go even further. We asked in Bombay for the constitution of a large World Fund fed with a part of military expenses, in order to help the most disadvantaged. What is valid for the immediate fight against poverty, is equally valid at the level of development. Only a global collaboration, of which a common fund would be both symbol and instrument, would make it possible to overcome sterile rivalries and foster a peaceful and fruitful dialogue between all peoples.

52
52. Without a doubt, bilateral or multilateral agreements can continue to exist; They allow relations of dependency and bitterness that arose in the colonial era to be replaced by happy relations of friendship, developed on a basis of legal and political equality. But incorporated into a global collaborative program, they would be clear of all suspicion. The distrust of the beneficiaries would be mitigated. These would be less afraid of certain manifestations hidden under financial aid or technical assistance of what has been called neocolonialism, in the form of political pressures and economic domination aimed at defending or conquering a dominating hegemony.

53
53. Who does not also see that such a fund would facilitate the reduction of certain waste, resulting from fear or pride? When so many people are hungry, when so many homes suffer misery, when so many men live submerged in ignorance, when so many schools, hospitals, and homes worthy of this name still have to be built, every public or private waste, every expense of national or personal ostentation, every arms race becomes an intolerable scandal. We are forced to report it. Those responsible may want to hear from us before it is too late.

54
54. This means that it is essential to establish dialogue among all, in favor of which we made our wishes in our first encyclical Ecclesiam suam. This dialogue between those who provide the means and those who benefit from them will allow contributions to be measured not only according to the generosity and availability of some, but also according to the real needs and employment possibilities of others. With this, developing countries will no longer run the risk of being overwhelmed by doubts, the satisfaction of which absorbs most of their benefits. The interest rates and duration of the loans must be arranged in a way that is bearable for both parties, balancing free aid, interest-free loans, or loans with minimal interest, and the duration of repayments. Those who provide the financial means can be given guarantees about the use that will be made of the money, according to the agreed plan and with reasonable efficiency, since it is not about favoring the lazy and parasites. And the beneficiaries will be able to demand that there be no interference in their politics and that their social structure not be disturbed. As sovereign States, it is up to them to direct their affairs themselves, determine their policy and freely orient themselves towards the form of society they have chosen. It is, therefore, about establishing voluntary collaboration, effective participation of one another, on a level of equal dignity, to build a civil coexistence truly worthy of man.

55
55. The task could seem impossible in regions where concern for daily subsistence monopolizes the entire existence of families incapable of conceiving a job that prepares them for a less miserable future. And yet, it is precisely these men and women who must be helped, who must be convinced to carry out their own development themselves and to progressively acquire the means to do so. This common work will not move forward, of course, without a concentrated, constant and courageous effort. But let each one be deeply convinced: the lives of poor people, the civil peace of developing countries and the peace of the world are at stake.

56
56. The truly considerable efforts that have been made to help developing countries financially and technically would be illusory if their results were partially nullified by the game of trade relations between rich and poor countries. The trust of the latter would be broken if they had the impression that one hand takes away from them what the other gives them.

57
57. Highly industrialized nations export, above all, processed products, while less developed economies have nothing to sell other than agricultural products and raw materials. Thanks to technical progress, the former quickly increase in value and find a sufficient market. On the contrary, primary products that come from underdeveloped countries suffer wide and abrupt price variations, very far from this progressive surplus value. Hence great difficulties arise for less industrialized nations when they have to rely on their exports to balance their economy and carry out their development plan. Poor people always remain poor and the rich get richer and richer.

58
58. In other words, the rule of free trade alone cannot continue to govern international relations. Its advantages are undoubtedly evident when the parties are not in too unequal conditions of economic power: it is a stimulus to progress and rewards effort. That is why industrially developed countries see it as a law of justice. But it is no longer the same when conditions are too unequal from country to country: prices that are formed "freely" in the market can lead to inequitable results. It is, therefore, the fundamental principle of liberalism, as a rule of commercial exchanges, that is in dispute here.

59
59. The teaching of Leo What was true about the fair individual salary is also true about international contracts: an exchange economy can no longer rest on the sole law of free competition, which too often engenders an economic dictatorship. Free exchange is only equitable if it is subject to the demands of social justice.

60
60. Furthermore, the developed countries themselves have understood this, and they strive with appropriate measures to restore, within their own economy, a balance that competition, left to its own devices, tends to jeopardize. Thus it happens that they often sustain their agriculture at the cost of sacrifices imposed on the most favored economic sectors. Likewise, to maintain the commercial relations that develop between them, particularly within a common market, their financial, fiscal and social policy strives to provide similar opportunities to competing industries of unequal prosperity.

61
61. It would not be right to use two weights and two measures here. What is valid in the national economy, what is accepted between developed countries, is also valid in commercial relations between rich and poor countries. Without abolishing the competitive market, it must be kept within the limits that make it fair and moral, and, therefore, humane. In trade between developed and underdeveloped economies, the situations are too disparate, and the real freedoms too unequal. Social justice requires that international trade, to be humane and moral, restores at least a certain equality of opportunity between the parties. The latter is a long-term objective. But to achieve this, it is necessary to create real equality in discussions and negotiations from now on. Here too, international conventions of a sufficiently broad scope would be useful: they would establish general norms with a view to regularizing certain prices, guaranteeing certain productions, supporting certain nascent industries. Who does not see that such a common effort towards greater justice in commercial relations between peoples would provide developing countries with positive help, the effects of which would not only be immediate, but lasting?

62
62. Other obstacles also oppose the formation of a more just and more structured world within universal solidarity: we are referring to nationalism and racism. It is natural that communities that have recently achieved political independence are jealous of a still fragile national unity and strive to protect it. It is also normal for nations with old culture to be proud of the heritage that history has bequeathed to them. But these legitimate feelings must be sublimated by universal charity, which encompasses all members of the human family. Nationalism isolates people against what is their true good. It would be particularly harmful where the weakness of national economies requires, on the contrary, the pooling of efforts, knowledge and financial means to carry out development programs and increase commercial and cultural exchanges.

63
63. Racism is not the exclusive heritage of young nations, where it is sometimes disguised under the rivalries of clans and political parties, to the great prejudice of justice and danger to civil peace. During the colonial era it has often created a wall of separation between colonizers and indigenous people, creating obstacles to fruitful mutual intelligence and causing many resentments as a result of real injustices. It is also an obstacle to collaboration between less favored nations and a ferment of division and hatred within the States themselves when, with contempt for the imprescriptible rights of the human person, individuals and families are unjustly subjected to a regime of exception due to their race or color.

64
64. Such a situation, so fraught with threats for the future, deeply afflicts us. We hope, however, that a more felt need for collaboration and a keener sense of solidarity will eventually prevail over misunderstandings and selfishness. We hope that countries whose development is less advanced will know how to take advantage of their neighborhood to organize among themselves, over territorially extensive areas, zones of joint development: establish common programs, coordinate investments, distribute production possibilities, organize exchanges. We also hope that multilateral and international organizations will find, through a necessary reorganization, the paths that will allow the still underdeveloped peoples to get out of the quagmires in which they seem to be trapped and discover for themselves, within fidelity to their peculiar way of being, the means for their social and human progress.

65
65. Because that is the goal that must be reached. Global solidarity, becoming more efficient every day, must allow all peoples to become architects of their destiny for themselves. The past has too often been marked by relations of force between nations; May the day come when international relations bear the stamp of mutual respect and friendship, of interdependence in collaboration and of common promotion under the responsibility of each one. Younger or weaker people demand to play an active part in the construction of a better world, more respectful of the rights and vocation of each person. This cry is legitimate; It is the responsibility of each one to listen to it and respond to it.

66
66. The world is sick. Its evil lies less in the sterilization of resources and their hoarding by some than in the lack of brotherhood between men and between peoples.

67
67. We cannot insist too much on the duty of hospitality – the duty of human solidarity and Christian charity – which is incumbent on both families and cultural organizations of countries that welcome foreigners. It is necessary to multiply residences and homes that welcome, above all, young people. This, above all, to protect them against loneliness, the feeling of abandonment, and anguish, which destroy all moral springs. Also to defend them against the unhealthy situation in which they find themselves, forced to compare the extreme poverty of their homeland with the luxury and waste that often surrounds them. And also to protect them from subversive doctrines and aggressive temptations that assail them at the memory of so much "undeserved misery." Above all, in short, to offer them, with the warmth of a fraternal welcome, the example of a healthy life, the esteem of authentic and effective Christian charity, the appreciation of spiritual values.

68
68. It is painful to think about it: many young people who come to more advanced countries to receive science, competence and culture, which will make them better suited to serve their country, certainly acquire more qualified training, but all too often they lose the esteem for spiritual values that are often found, as a precious heritage, in those civilizations that have seen them grow.

69
69. The same welcome must be offered to migrant workers, who often live in inhumane conditions, saving from their salaries to support their families, who are in misery in their native land.

70
70. Our second recommendation is addressed to those whose businesses call to countries recently opened to industrialization: industrialists, merchants, leaders or representatives of large companies. It often happens that they are not devoid of social sense in their own country; Why again go back to the inhumane principles of individualism when working in less developed countries? The superiority of their situation should, on the contrary, make them the initiators of social progress and human promotion wherever their business calls them. Their very sense of organization should suggest to them the means of valuing indigenous work, of training qualified workers, of preparing engineers and middle managers, of leaving room for their initiatives, of progressively introducing them to the highest positions, preparing them so that in the near future they can share with them the responsibilities of management. May at least justice always regulate the relationships between bosses and subordinates. That well-established contracts govern reciprocal obligations. In short, let there be nothing, whatever their situation, that leaves them unjustly subjected to arbitrariness.

71
71. We are glad that there are more and more technicians sent on development missions by international or bilateral institutions or private organizations; "They should not behave as dominators, but rather as assistants and collaborators." A people immediately perceives whether those who come to their aid do so with or without affection, to apply techniques or to give man all his value. Your message is exposed to not being received if it is not accompanied by brotherly love.

72
72. To the necessary technical competence, then, they must add the authentic signs of selfless love. Free of all nationalist pride, as well as any appearance of racism, technicians must learn to work closely with everyone. They know that their competence does not give them superiority in all areas. The civilization that has formed them certainly contains elements of universal humanism, but it is neither unique nor exclusive and cannot be imported without adaptation. The agents of these missions will make a sincere effort to discover, along with its history, the components and cultural riches of the country that receives them. This will establish a contact that will fertilize both civilizations.

73
73. Among civilizations, as between people, sincere dialogue is, in effect, a creator of brotherhood. The enterprise of development will bring people closer together in the achievements pursued by the common effort, if everyone, from the rulers and their representatives to the most humble technician, feel animated by brotherly love and moved by the sincere desire to build a civilization of global solidarity. A dialogue centered on man, and not on products or techniques, will then begin. It will be fruitful if it provides the people who benefit from it with the means that elevate and spiritualize it; if the technicians become educators and if the teachings given are marked by such a high spiritual and moral quality that they guarantee not only economic, but also human development. Beyond technical assistance, the relationships thus established will endure. Who does not see the importance that they will then have for the peace of the world?

74
74. Many young people have already responded with ardor and dedication to Pius XII's call for a missionary laity. There are also many who have spontaneously made themselves available to organizations, official or private, that collaborate with developing people. We feel great satisfaction in knowing that in certain nations "military service" can become, in part, a "social service", a simple service. We are blessed by these initiatives and the good will of those who support them. May all those who call themselves Christ be able to hear his call: “I was hungry and you gave me food; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was a stranger, and you welcomed me; I was naked, and you clothed me; sick, and you visited me; in jail; and you came to see me! ( [+[0]+] ). No one can remain indifferent to the fate of their brothers who still lie in misery, prey to ignorance, victims of insecurity. Like the heart of Christ, the heart of the Christian must feel compassion for so much misery: "I feel compassion for this crowd" ( [+[1]+] ).

75
75. Everyone's prayer must fervently rise to the Almighty, so that humanity, aware of such great calamities, applies itself intelligently and firmly to abolish them. This prayer must correspond to the complete dedication of each person, to the extent of their strength and possibilities, to the fight against underdevelopment. May individuals, social groups and nations join hands fraternally; the strong helping the weak to get up, putting all his competence, his enthusiasm and his selfless love into it. More than anyone else, he who is animated by true charity is ingenious in discovering the causes of misery, in finding the means to combat it, in overcoming it with intrepidity. Friend of peace, "will continue on his path, radiating joy and pouring light and grace into the hearts of men throughout the face of the earth, making them discover, above all borders, the face of brothers, the face of friends."

76
76. Too great economic, social and cultural differences between peoples cause tensions and discord and endanger peace. As We told the Council Fathers upon our return from our peace trip to the UN, "the condition of developing peoples must be the object of our consideration, or, better yet, our charity with the poor in the world - and these are infinite legions - must be more attentive, more active, more generous." Fighting misery and fighting injustice is to promote, at the same time as greater well-being, the human and spiritual progress of all, and, consequently, the common good of humanity. Peace is not reduced to an absence of war, the result of the always precarious balance of forces. Peace is built day by day, in the establishment of an order desired by God, which entails a more perfect justice among men.

77
77. Builders of their own development, the people are primarily responsible for it. But they will not do it in isolation. Regional agreements between weak peoples in order to support each other, broader agreements to come to their aid, more ambitious conventions between each other to establish concerted programs, are the milestones on this path of development that leads to peace.

78
78. This international collaboration with a global vocation requires institutions that prepare, coordinate and govern it until a universally recognized legal order is built. With all our hearts, we are encouraged by the organizations that have put their hand into this development collaboration and hope that their authority grows. «Your vocation – we told the representatives of the United Nations in New York – is to make fraternize not only some peoples, but all peoples ( [+[0]+] ). Who does not see the need to progressively establish a world authority that can act effectively in the legal and political fields?

79
79. Some will believe such hopes are utopian. It is possible that the realistic sense of those who think this way is defective, because they do not perceive the accelerated course of this era, in which men want to live more fraternally and, despite their ignorance, their errors, their sins, their relapses into barbarism and their remote strayings off the path of salvation, they slowly approach, even without realizing it, towards their Creator. This path towards more and better feelings of humanity requires effort and sacrifice, but the same suffering, accepted out of love for our brothers, is a bringer of progress for the entire human family. Christians know that union with the sacrifice of the Savior contributes to the building up of the Body of Christ in its fullness: the gathered people of God.

80
80. In this march, we are all in solidarity. We have all wanted to remind ourselves of the breadth of the drama and the urgency of the work that must be carried out. The time for action has already struck; The survival of so many innocent children, the access to a human condition for so many unfortunate families, the peace of the world, the future of civilization, are at stake. All men and all peoples must assume their responsibilities.

81
81. We conjure ourselves first of all to all our children. In developing countries no less than in others, lay people must assume the renewal of the temporal order as their own task. If the role of the Hierarchy is to teach and authentically interpret the moral principles that must be followed in this field, it is up to the laity, with their free initiative and without passively waiting for instructions and guidelines, to penetrate with a Christian spirit the mentality and customs, laws and structures of the community in which they live. Changes are necessary; profound, indispensable reforms: they must be used resolutely to infuse them with the evangelical spirit. To our Catholic children from the most favored countries, We ask that you contribute your competence and your active participation in official or private, civil or religious organizations, dedicated to overcoming the difficulties of developing countries. We are sure that they will make every effort to be in the front row among those who work to bring an international morality of justice and equity to reality.

82
82. All Christians, our brothers, We are sure of it, will want to expand their common and concerted effort in order to help the world triumph over selfishness, pride and rivalries; to overcome ambitions and injustices, to open to all the paths of a more human life in which each one is loved and helped as his neighbor and brother. Still moved by our unforgettable meeting in Bombay with our non-Christian brothers, we again invite you to collaborate with all your heart and with all your intelligence so that all the children of men can lead a life worthy of children of God.

83
83. Finally, We address all men of good will aware that the path to peace passes through development. Delegates to international institutions, statesmen, publicists, educators, everyone, each in their place, you are the leaders of a new world. We beseech the almighty God to enlighten your intelligence and give you new strength and encouragement to put public opinion on alert and communicate enthusiasm to the people. Educators, it belongs to you to awaken from childhood the love for people who find themselves in misery. Publicists, it is up to you to put before our eyes the effort made to promote mutual aid between peoples, as well as the spectacle of the miseries that men tend to forget to calm their consciences; Let the rich at least know that the poor are at their door and waiting for the crumbs of their banquets.

84
84. Statesmen, it is up to you to mobilize your communities in more effective global solidarity, and above all to make them accept the necessary reductions in their luxury and expenditure to promote development and save peace. Delegates of international organizations, it depends on you that the dangerous and sterile confrontation of forces gives way to friendly, peaceful and disinterested collaboration, in order to achieve solidarity-based progress for humanity in which all men can develop.

85
85. And if it is true that the world is in a lamentable vacuum of ideas, We appeal to thinkers and wise men, Catholics, Christians, worshipers of God, eager for absolutes, justice and truth: all men of good will. Following the example of Christ, We dare to insistently ask you to “seek and you will find” ([+[0]+]); undertake the paths that lead, through collaboration, the deepening of knowledge, the breadth of the heart, to a more fraternal life in a truly universal human community.

86
86. All of you who have heard the call of the suffering people, you who work to give them a response, you are the apostles of authentic and true development that does not consist of selfish wealth desired for its own sake, but in the economy at the service of man, daily bread distributed to all, as a source of brotherhood and a sign of Providence.

87
87. With all our hearts We bless you and call on all men to join you fraternally. Because if development is the new name for peace, who wouldn't want to work with all their might to achieve it? Yes, We invite you all to respond to our cry of anguish, in the name of the Lord.
