1
1. "I supply in my flesh," says the apostle Paul, indicating the salvific value of suffering, "what is lacking in the tribulations of Christ for his body, which is the Church"[1].

2
2. The theme of suffering – precisely under the aspect of this salvific meaning – seems to be deeply inserted in the context of the Year of Redemption as an extraordinary Jubilee of the Church; This circumstance also speaks directly in favor of the attention that must be paid to it precisely during this period. Regardless of this fact, it is a universal theme that accompanies man throughout the geography. In a certain sense it coexists with it in the world and therefore we must constantly return to it. Although Saint Paul has written in the letter to the Romans that "the entire creation until now groans and is in travail"[3]; Although man knows well and is aware of the sufferings of the animal world, nevertheless what we express with the word "suffering" seems to be particularly essential to the nature of man. This is as profound as man, precisely because it manifests in its own way the depth of man and in some way surpasses it. Suffering seems to belong to the transcendence of man; It is one of those points in which man is in a certain sense "destined" to surpass himself, and in a mysterious way is called to do so.

3
3. If the issue of suffering must be addressed in a particular way in the context of the Year of Redemption, this happens above all because redemption has been accomplished through the cross of Christ, that is, through his suffering. And at the same time, in the Year of Redemption we think again of the truth expressed in the Encyclical Redemptor Hominis: in Christ "each man becomes the path of the Church"[4]. It can be said that man becomes in a particular way the path of the Church when suffering enters his life. This happens, as is known, at various times in life; It is done in different ways; it assumes diverse dimensions; However, in one form or another, suffering seems to be, and is, almost inseparable from man's earthly existence.

4
4. This reflection also derives from here, precisely in the Year of Redemption: the reflection on suffering. Human suffering arouses compassion, it also arouses respect, and in its own way it is frightening. Indeed, the greatness of a specific mystery is contained in it. This particular respect for all human suffering must be placed at the beginning of what will be explained below from the deepest need of the heart, and also from the profound imperative of faith. On the subject of suffering, these two motives seem to come particularly close and unite with each other: the need of the heart commands us to overcome timidity, and the imperative of faith - formulated, for example, in the words of Saint Paul recalled at the beginning - provides the content, in the name and by virtue of which we dare to touch what seems in every man something so intangible; because man, in his suffering, is an intangible mystery.

5
5. Although in its subjective dimension, as a personal fact, enclosed in the concrete and unrepeatable interior of man, suffering seems almost ineffable and non-transferable, perhaps at the same time nothing else demands - in its "objective reality" - to be treated, meditated on, conceived in the form of an explicit problem; and demands that fundamental questions be asked around it and answers sought. As you can see, it is not just a matter of giving a description of suffering. There are other criteria, which go beyond the sphere of description and which we must take into account when we want to penetrate the world of human suffering.

6
6. Holy Scripture is a great book about suffering. From the books of the Old Testament we will mention only a few examples of situations that bear the sign of suffering, above all moral: the danger of death[5], the death of one's own children[6], and especially the death of the first-born and only son[7]. Also the lack of children[8], the nostalgia for the homeland[9], the persecution and hostility of the environment[10], the scorn and ridicule towards those who suffer[11], the loneliness and abandonment[12]. And others, such as remorse of conscience[13], the difficulty in understanding why the wicked prosper and the righteous suffer[14], infidelity and ingratitude on the part of friends and neighbors[15], the misfortunes of the nation itself[16].

7
7. As seen through the examples given, in Holy Scripture we find a vast list of painful situations for man for various reasons. This diversified list certainly does not exhaust everything that has already been said about suffering and constantly repeats the book of the history of man ([+[0]+]), and even more so the book of the history of humanity, read through the history of each man.

8
8. Human suffering constitutes in itself almost a specific "world" that exists together with man, that appears in him and passes, or sometimes does not pass, but is consolidated and deepens in him. This world of suffering, divided into many and very numerous subjects, exists almost in dispersion. Each man, through his personal suffering, constitutes not only a small part of that "world", but at the same time that "world" is in him as a finite and unrepeatable entity. Linked to this is, however, the interpersonal and social dimension. The world of suffering has a certain compactness of its own. Men who suffer become similar to each other through the analogy of the situation, the test of destiny or through the need for understanding and attention; perhaps above all through the persistent question about the meaning of such a situation. Therefore, although the world of suffering exists in dispersion, at the same time it contains within itself a singular challenge to communion and solidarity. We will also try to follow that call in these reflections.

9
9. Within every suffering experienced by man, and also in the depths of the world of suffering, the question inevitably appears: why? It is a question about the cause, the reason; a question about purpose ( [+[0]+] ); In short, about meaning. This not only accompanies human suffering, but seems to even determine the human content, that is why suffering is properly human suffering.

10
10. Man can ask such a question to God with all the emotion of his heart and with a mind full of wonder and concern; God waits for the question and listens to it, as we can see in the Revelation of the Old Testament. In the book of Job the question has found its most vivid expression.

11
11. Job, however, answers the truth of the principle that identifies suffering with the punishment of sin and does so based on his own experience. In fact, he is aware of not having deserved such punishment, moreover, he exposes the good that he has done throughout his life. In the end God himself reproaches Job's friends for their accusations and recognizes that Job is not guilty. His is the suffering of an innocent; It must be accepted as a mystery that man cannot fully understand with his intelligence.

12
12. The book of Job insightfully explains the “why” of suffering; It also shows that it reaches the innocent, but does not yet provide the solution to the problem.

13
13. But in order to perceive the true answer to the "why" of suffering, we have to turn our gaze to the revelation of divine love, the ultimate source of the meaning of everything that exists. Love is also the richest source of the meaning of suffering, which is always a mystery; we are aware of the insufficiency and inadequacy of our explanations. Christ makes us enter the mystery and makes us discover the "why" of suffering, as we are capable of understanding the sublimity of divine love.

14
14. "For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, so that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life"[27]. These words, spoken by Christ in the conversation with Nicodemus, introduce us to the very center of God's saving action. They also manifest the very essence of Christian soteriology, that is, of the theology of salvation. Salvation means liberation from evil, and therefore is closely related to the problem of suffering. According to the words addressed to Nicodemus, God gives his Son to the "world" to free man from evil, which carries within itself the definitive and absolute perspective of suffering. Contemporaneously, the same word « gives » ( [+[0]+] ) indicates that this liberation must be accomplished by the only begotten Son through his own suffering. And in this, love is manifested, infinite love, both of that only begotten Son and of the Father, who therefore "gives" his Son. This is the love towards man, the love for the "world": saving love.

15
15. When it is said that Christ with his mission touches evil at its very roots, we think not only of definitive, eschatological evil and suffering ([+[0]+]), but also – at least indirectly – of evil and suffering in their temporal and historical dimension. Evil, in fact, is linked to sin and death. And although the suffering of man as a consequence of concrete sins must be judged with great caution ([+[1]+]), however, it cannot be separated from the sin of origin, from what in Saint John is called "the sin of the world"[29], from the sinful background of personal actions and social processes in the history of man. If it is not permissible to apply here the restricted criterion of direct dependence ([+[2]+]), however one cannot even renounce the criterion that, at the basis of human suffering, there is a multiple involvement with sin.

16
16. In his messianic activity in the midst of Israel, Christ incessantly approached the world of human suffering. "He went about doing good"[32], and this work of his was directed, above all, to the sick and those who were waiting for help. He healed the sick, consoled the afflicted, fed the hungry, freed men from deafness, blindness, leprosy, the devil and various physical handicaps; Three times he brought the dead back to life. He was sensitive to all human suffering, both of the body and the soul. At the same time he instructed, placing at the center of his teaching the eight beatitudes, which are addressed to men tested by various sufferings in their temporal life. These are the "poor in spirit", "those who cry", "those who hunger and thirst for righteousness", "those who suffer persecution for righteousness", when they are insulted, persecuted and, lying, say all kinds of evil against them for Christ...[33] So according to Matthew. Luke explicitly mentions those who are now hungry[34].

17
17. The Scriptures had to be fulfilled. There were many messianic witnesses of the Old Testament who announced the sufferings of the future Anointed One of God. Particularly moving among all is what we usually call the fourth Poem of the Servant of Yahweh, contained in the Book of Isaiah. The prophet, who is rightly called "the fifth evangelist," presents in this Poem the image of the sufferings of the Servant with a realism as acute as if he saw it with his own eyes: with those of the body and the spirit. The passion of Christ turns out, in the light of the verses of Isaiah, almost even more expressive and moving than in the descriptions of the evangelists themselves. Here is how the true Man of Sorrows appears before us:

18
18. It can be stated that the previous considerations take us directly to Gethsemane and Golgotha, where the Poem of the Suffering Servant, contained in the Book of Isaiah, was fulfilled. Before we get there, let us read the successive verses of the Poem, which give a prophetic anticipation of the passion of Gethsemane and Golgotha. The suffering Servant – and this in turn is essential for an analysis of the passion of Christ – takes on those sufferings, of which we have spoken, in a completely voluntary way:

19
19. The same Poem of the Suffering Servant from the book of Isaiah leads us precisely, through the successive verses, in the direction of this question and this answer:

20
20. The texts of the New Testament express this concept in many points. In the second letter to the Corinthians the Apostle writes: « In everything pressed, but not harassed; perplexed, but not disconcerted; persecuted, but not abandoned; dejected, but not annihilated, always carrying in the body the death of Christ, so that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our time. While we live we are always given over to death for the love of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our mortal flesh... knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will also raise us with Jesus..."[58].

21
21. The cross of Christ sheds a very penetrating salvific light on the life of man and, specifically, on his suffering, because through faith he achieves it together with the resurrection: the mystery of the passion is included in the paschal mystery. The witnesses of Christ's passion are at the same time witnesses of his resurrection. Saint Paul writes: "To know Him and the power of His resurrection and participation in His sufferings, conforming to Him in His death in order to achieve the resurrection of the dead"[64].

22
22. Joined to the perspective of the kingdom of God is the hope of that glory, the beginning of which is in the cross of Christ. The resurrection has revealed this glory – the eschatological glory – that on the cross of Christ was completely obscured by the immensity of suffering. Those who share in the sufferings of Christ are also called, through their own sufferings, to share in the glory. Paul expresses this at various points. He writes to the Romans: «We are... joint heirs of Christ, provided we suffer with Him to be glorified with Him. I am certain that the sufferings of the present time are nothing in comparison with the glory that is to be manifested in us »[67]. In the second letter to the Corinthians we read: "For for the momentary and light tribulation an eternal weight of incalculable glory is prepared for us, and we fix our eyes not on the visible things, but on the invisible ones"[68]. The apostle Peter will express this truth in the following words of his first letter: "But you must rejoice to the extent that you share in the sufferings of Christ, so that at the revelation of his glory you may exult with joy"[69].

23
23. Suffering, in fact, is always a test - sometimes a quite hard test - to which humanity is subjected. From the pages of Saint Paul's letters he frequently speaks to us about that evangelical paradox of weakness and strength, experienced in a particular way by the Apostle himself and which, together with him, is experienced by all those who participate in the sufferings of Christ. He writes in the second letter to the Corinthians: "Most gladly, then, I will continue to glory in my weaknesses so that the strength of Christ may dwell in me"[72]. In the second letter to Timothy we read: "For this cause I suffer, but I am not ashamed, because I know to whom I have entrusted myself"[73]. And in the letter to the Philippians he will even say: "I can do all things in him who comforts me"[74].

24
24. However, the experience of the Apostle, a participant in the sufferings of Christ, goes further. In the letter to the Colossians we read the words that constitute almost the last stage of the spiritual itinerary regarding suffering. Saint Paul writes: «Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you and I make up in my flesh for what is lacking in the tribulations of Christ for his body, which is the Church»[78]. And he himself, in another Letter, asks the recipients: «Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ? »[79].

25
25. The witnesses of the cross and resurrection of Christ have transmitted to the Church and humanity a specific Gospel of suffering. The Redeemer himself has written this Gospel first of all with his own suffering assumed out of love, so that man "may not perish, but may have eternal life"[80]. This suffering, together with the living word of his teaching, has become a rich source for all who have participated in the sufferings of Jesus in the first generation of his disciples and confessors and then in those that have followed throughout the centuries.

26
26. If the first great chapter of the Gospel of suffering is written, throughout the generations, by those who suffer persecution for Christ, another great chapter of this Gospel equally develops throughout history. It is written by all those who suffer with Christ, uniting their own human sufferings with their saving suffering. In them is realized what the first witnesses of the passion and resurrection have said and written about participation in the sufferings of Christ. Consequently, in them the Gospel of suffering is fulfilled and, at the same time, each one of them continues in a certain way to write it; He writes it and proclaims it to the world, announces it in his environment and to contemporary men.

27
27. The Apostle speaks of this joy in the letter to the Colossians: "Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you"[88]. Overcoming the sense of uselessness of suffering becomes a source of joy, a feeling that is sometimes deeply rooted in human suffering. This not only consumes the man within himself, but seems to make him a burden to others. Man feels condemned to receive help and assistance from others and, at the same time, considers himself useless. The discovery of the salvific meaning of suffering in union with Christ transforms this depressing sensation. Faith in participation in the sufferings of Christ carries with it the inner certainty that the man who suffers "completes what is lacking in the sufferings of Christ"; that in the spiritual dimension of the work of redemption he serves, like Christ, for the salvation of his brothers and sisters. Therefore, he is not only useful to others, but he even performs an irreplaceable service. In the body of Christ, which grows incessantly from the cross of the Redeemer, precisely suffering, penetrated by the spirit of Christ's sacrifice, is the irreplaceable mediator and author of the goods indispensable for the salvation of the world. Suffering, more than anything else, is what opens the way to the grace that transforms souls. Suffering, more than anything else, makes the force of Redemption present in the history of humanity. The "cosmic" struggle involves the spiritual forces of good and evil, of which the letter to the Ephesians speaks[89]. Human suffering, united with the redemptive suffering of Christ, constitutes a particular support for the forces of good, opening the way to the victory of these saving forces.

28
28. The parable of the good Samaritan also belongs to the Gospel of suffering – and in an organic way. Through this parable Christ wanted to answer the question "And who is my neighbor?" »[90]. In fact, among the three who were traveling along the road from Jerusalem to Jericho, where a man robbed and wounded by thieves was lying half dead on the ground, precisely the Samaritan proved to be truly the "neighbor" to that unfortunate man. "Neighbor" also means the one who fulfilled the commandment to love one's neighbor. Two other men were walking the same path; One was a priest and the other a Levite, but each one "saw him and passed by." Instead, the Samaritan "saw him and had compassion... He approached him, bandaged his wounds", then "took him to the inn and took care of him"[91]. And at the time of leaving, he entrusted the care of the injured man to the innkeeper, agreeing to pay the corresponding expenses.

29
29. Following the Gospel parable, one could say that suffering, which in so many different forms is present in the human world, is also present to radiate love for man, precisely that selfless gift of one's own "I" in favor of other men, of men who suffer. It could be said that the world of human suffering constantly invokes another world: that of human love; and that selfless love, which springs up in his heart and in his works, man owes in some way to suffering. The "neighbor" man cannot pass with disinterest in the suffering of others, in the name of fundamental human solidarity; and much less in the name of love for one's neighbor. He must "stand", "be moved", acting like the Samaritan in the Gospel parable. The parable itself expresses a truth that is deeply Christian, but at the same time so universally human. Not without reason, even in common language, any activity in favor of suffering men and all those in need of help is called "good Samaritan work."

30
30. The parable of the good Samaritan, which - as we have said - belongs to the Gospel of suffering, walks with it throughout the history of the Church and Christianity, throughout the history of man and humanity. It testifies that Christ's revelation of the salvific meaning of suffering is in no way identified with an attitude of passivity. It's quite the opposite. The Gospel is the denial of passivity in the face of suffering. Christ himself, in this aspect, is above all active. In this way he carries out the messianic program of his mission, according to the words of the prophet: «The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to evangelize the poor; He sent me to preach freedom to the captives, recovery of sight to the blind; to set free the oppressed, to announce a year of favor from the Lord »[93]. Christ carries out this messianic program of his mission with superabundance: He spends his time “doing good”[94], and the good of his works stands out above all in the face of human suffering. The parable of the good Samaritan is in deep harmony with the behavior of Christ himself.

31
31. This is the meaning of suffering, truly supernatural and at the same time human. It is supernatural, because it is rooted in the divine mystery of the redemption of the world, and it is also deeply human, because in it man finds himself, his own humanity, his own dignity and his own mission.
